Anti-pesticidal initiatives are losing speed Broadcasted on Wednesday, a poll shows that both initiatives are struggling. They divide the electorate into two distinct ATS camps The two anti-pesticidal initiatives have lost support, the "yes" being at present slightly below 50%. The yes to the CO2 law also recedes, but remains the majority. The Covid and anti-terrorism laws remain popular with two thirds of the respondents. As in the first poll two weeks ago, anti-pesticidal initiatives and the CO2 law divide the electorate into two distinct camps, showing the new 20 Minutes/Tamedia survey, conducted five weeks before the votes of June 13 and broadcast on Wednesday. The voters of the UDC and the PLR remain clearly opposed to these texts in favour of the environment. On the other hand, the approval of Green, PS and Liberal Green supporters is very high. With this clear polarization, mobilization in both camps and voting behaviour at the centre will be decisive. Greens and the City of Point Support for the Clean Drinking Water Initiative has decreased by six percentage points from the first survey. 48% of respondents now agree with the proposal, while 50% would reject it. The left-wing voters and the Liberal Greens are in favour of the initiative, while the voters of the UDC, the PLR and the Centre are opposed to it. As expected, support is highest among the Greens, as well as among urban dwellers, who are 62% to approve it. As in the first survey, it is clear that the proposal is particularly difficult to reach young people. For example, only 30% of 18-34 year olds approve of the scheme, compared with 51% of those over 65. The most convincing argument for supporters is that more than a million people in Switzerland use water contaminated with pesticides from agriculture. The rejection of opponents is based on the idea that the initiative would weaken agriculture because it could produce less food. Equal Camps for the other initiative Approval of the initiative "for a Switzerland without synthetic pesticides" is also declining. Five weeks before the vote, 49% were in favour of the project and 49% opposed it, 2% not speaking. As for the lines of conflict between voters, the pattern is almost the same as for the drinking water initiative. It is similar at the party level. The initiative is also supported more strongly in the city and with increasing age. The proponents are particularly convinced by the scientists' argument that pesticides are a health hazard, a link between these products and certain types of cancer, and a decrease in fertility. Opponents believe that the initiative poses a threat to security of supply and will lead to higher food prices by complicating production and imports. Short majority for the CO2 law The CO2 law has also lost support, but remains approved by a very short majority: 50% of respondents are in favour, 46% against, 4% not declaring their voting intentions. As with the two agricultural initiatives, this bill divides partisans and opponents into well-defined camps. The supporters of the UDC and the PLR are opposed to it, the centrist electorate is divided into two camps of equal size, while the voters of the Greens, the PS and the Liberal Greens are very clearly in favour of the text. As with anti-pesticidal initiatives, mobilization in both camps and voting behaviour at the centre will be decisive. The divide is also clear between cities and rural areas, with urban dwellers in favour of the law and rural dwellers opposed (61% versus 42% of the yes). For its supporters, the law has an incentive effect that rewards climate-friendly behaviour, with people emitting more CO2 paying more. Opponents believe that the climate problem will not be solved by taxes, but only by innovation.