In view of the votes of 13 June, environmental projects are ranked The first poll conducted by the gfs.bern institute for the SSR suggests the yes for the CO2 law, the Covid-19 law and the police measures against terrorism. The two anti-pesticid initiatives are also supported by a majority, but their fate remains open Bernard Wuthrich Five weeks before the election, it is an environmental vote that is emerging for June 13, according to the first poll conducted by the institute gfs.bern for the SSR. But be careful: if the yes is in the lead for both pesticide initiatives, the next few weeks, as is often the case with popular initiatives, can still bring opinion to the side of no. As for the CO2 law, it is, for the time being, quite clearly yes. The clean drinking water initiative and the one which wants to ban synthetic pesticides have comparable public support: the yes is 54% for the first and 55% for the second, while the no is 40% and 42% respectively. Approval is more pronounced in French and Italian-speaking Switzerland than in other countries. 60% yes to the CO2 law Both initiatives are at a stage of forming the opinion called "mean". gfs.bern leaves "open" the outcome of the vote on these two proposals. In both cases, the same pattern appears. The urban population and retired people have a greater sympathy for these environmental measures: 65% of the inhabitants of cities and agglomerations are in favour of the clean water initiative, compared with only 41% in rural areas. While the fate of the two texts remains uncertain, the fate of the CO2 law seems clearer. With 60%, yes far ahead of no (35%). The stage of the formation of opinion is described as'medium to advanced'. The support is very clear to the left and to the center. The rejection of the reform is equally clear to the UDC electorate. On the other hand, the formation of opinion is still "not very strong" at the PLR, which recommends the yes. Men, the middle class, Italian Switzerland and rural areas are more critical than other categories of the population surveyed. The increase in heating and car use, mainly in peripheral areas, seems to be the main concern of skeptics. The Covid-19 Act widely approved The other two objects of the June 13 election are on the way to acceptance. The law on police measures to combat terrorism was approved at 67%, but positions were not yet clearly defined. gfs.bern is not yet in danger of prognosis on the final result of the vote. As for the Covid-19 law, the yes largely leads the ball with 67%, against only 29% of no. It should be adopted by a large majority. Apart from the UDC and the government's distrust, support is broad enough for a project that serves as a legal basis for support measures for businesses and people who are responsible for health restrictions. The survey was conducted for 15 days among 22,732 voting rights holders. The margin of error is about 2.8%.