Opinions Law on CO2: Switzerland cannot remain EDITORIAL ice. With the CO2 law, the Swiss population has the opportunity and no doubt also the duty to demonstrate that it is concerned with global warming, which affects it very directly. But no one will have to be left on the roadside Bernard Wuthrich Switzerland has a reputation for fulfilling its political commitments. With the CO2 law, it has the perfect opportunity to demonstrate that the Paris Climate Agreement is not a mere declaration of intent. Although modest in its contribution to the state of the planet, on 13 June it can demonstrate that its promise to protect the climate is not an empty shell. Switzerland has the means and probably the duty to add its stone to the global environmental building. In particular, because, the cradle of glaciers, the water castle of the European continent, it is directly affected by the warming, which melts snows from time to time eternal and releases strips of rocks previously frozen by permafrost, now in the process of liquefaction. The new CO2 law will provide important means to turn away from the most polluting behaviors and promote resources that are more in harmony with nature conservation. The climate fund will support a range of programmes: clean heating, building cleanliness, night trains, technological innovations, etc. However, this reform is the result of a political compromise. Like any compromise, it is imperfect. The medal has its setback, or rather its setbacks. Almost improvised by parliament, the climate fund can be seen as a gas plant, a kind of tote that it will be, after the necessary yes of 13 June, extracting the best projects. Another delicate point is that, in order to encourage people to change their habits by changing their heating or vehicle, the law will penalise those who, despite subsidies, will not have the means to do so. These people are mainly in the peripheral regions. This will be a concern when implementing the new rules so as not to leave them on the roadside. Even imperfect, the CO2 law must be supported. It is not conceivable that Switzerland will do nothing to preserve the climate, as suggested by the oil and automotive lobby, which obviously have no interest in seeing the energy market transform. Nor is it conceivable to reject the reform on the pretext that it does not go far enough or fast enough, as the climate activists affirm, whose discourse of impatience and idealism would, if it were heard, have dramatic economic and social consequences.