The UDC is preparing a new initiative against the SSR, a "leftist" medium Revealed by the "SonntagsBlick", a new initiative would aim on the one hand a reduction of the fee to 200 francs, on the other hand the modification of the composition of the editorials of the public service, so that they would accommodate more bourgeois sensitivities Florian Fischbacher L的UDC does not decelerate against the SSR. As a new reason for anger, none of its representatives was invited last week to the programme "Club", a debate programme of the SRF, devoted to the framework agreement between Switzerland and the European Union. The party immediately announced "political measures" against this "activist channel" and a complaint to the Independent Broadcasting Complaints Authority. Going further, the national UDC advisor Thomas Matter announced in the SonntagsBlick that his party was also planning to launch a popular initiative to ensure a "more balanced" treatment of political news about public service. "With this show, we have reached the point where we have to act." He is all the more insurgent against the non-invitation of the UDC because the European question is one of the main themes of the first party in Switzerland. "If a political show about the CO2 law were organised without the Greens, they would be mad. Right!" Thomas Matter says in the Sunday newspaper. Das Schweizer Fernsehen SRF ist ausser Rand und Band. ?? Medienmitteilung der SVP:https://t.co/vJIjWdyrdM pic.twitter.com/3mRY9CxIf6 — SVP Schweiz (@SVPch) June 2, 2021 Three years after the people had rejected the "No Billag" initiative, which wanted the abolition of the royalty, the UDC is planning to launch a new initiative. According to Thomas Matter, the "gauchisation" of the public service "has only made it worse" since that vote. The party thus envisages two scenarios. The first would be to attack again the fee, reduced since 2021 from 365 to 335 francs per year, by proposing to increase it to 200 francs. The second, less precise for the time being, foresees that the management, the board of directors and "the editors of all political programmes must reflect the political landscape of Switzerland", explains the Zurich national councillor, who advocates for more journalists belonging to the bourgeois camp, in the image of the majority of the population. In support of his comment, he cites a 2017 study that says that 70% of SSR journalists said they were on the left, a "untenable" situation for a "tax-funded" media. Read also: The radio-TV fee is a leap for "Left Propagand" dealers In 24 Hours, her colleague from Geneva party Céline Amaudruz supports the project: "The practical modalities have to be defined but the idea is worth thinking about". For her, "the RTS has resumed its habits of the unique thought of the left." An analysis shared by PLR National Councillor Christian Lüscher, who had insurgentized himself against the organisation of a radio debate by the RTS about the CO2 law without his party's representative. According to him, "the RTS did not understand the message. The rejection of "No Billag" has been interpreted as a white-sing to make left propaganda completely liberated." While he shares the UDC's observation, Christian Lüscher seems to differ on the proposed solutions. He said that he believed "in the need for a strong public service", but envisaged a way "to strengthen sanctions if a public service journalist broke the rules". The SRF quickly reacted to the attacks on the right, saying that it would not allow any party to dictate to him who was invited on his antenna. "There has always been these pressure attempts, and they have increased recently," said Blick Gregor Meier, deputy editor, assuring that television "does not make tendentious reports." Also read: Pascal Crittin: "To survive, the RTS must transform" "Everything is a matter of point of view," notes 24 Hours. For example, the daily newspaper Vaudois recalls that in May, the Socialist National Councillor Jacqueline Badran (ZH) said she wanted to launch a left-wing news platform, because "the Swiss media become monopolies and are on the whole on the PLR line".