Swiss aviation demands a large bowl of air Airports, employers, trade unions are mobilising so that the aviation industry can restart. They adopt a manifesto which they have transmitted to the Federal Council. This document is criticized by climate activists Bernard Wuthrich The aviation sector is mobilizing as never before. In an approach called "Back in the air", he asked the Federal Council to act in order to promote the recovery of a sector crucial to the Swiss economy. Signed by the Geneva and Zurich airport directorates, the Aerosuisse umbrella association, employers' organisations and trade unions, it sets out three basic principles. First, there should be no travel restrictions between countries that present a similar risk of contagion. Second, passengers vaccinated, cured or receiving a negative covid test must be free to enter Switzerland, move or leave without hindrance other than an antigenic test. Thirdly, the health status of these passengers must be recorded in an internationally harmonized digital document. These claims were handed over to the President of the Confederation, Guy Parmelin, on Thursday at Zurich Airport. "A small internal market" "Switzerland is a small internal market that needs direct air links around the world, for international organisations based in Geneva, for multinationals, for exporting industries such as pharma, watchmaking and machinery. Air freight accounts for 50% of exports in terms of value and up to 82% for intercontinental exports", argues the chief economist of the economysuisse, Rudolf Minsch, partner of the approach. "I recall that we don't buy a 2 million francs machine on catalogue. Direct relations are essential," he adds. The unions joined the industry's application. "The situation of air navigation personnel is alarming. Two thirds of employees are partially unemployed. Zurich airport turns 25%. Switzerland is dependent on its international relations. The Confederation requires a negative test when entering Switzerland by air. It does not require it for arrivals by train or car. This disadvantage must be ruled out", demands Daniel Lampart, chief economist of the Swiss Union of Trade Unions (USS). Climate strikers protest Like the president of the Kapers Cabin Staff Union, Sandrine Nikolic-Fuss, he asked that partial unemployment be extended to 24 months. The aviation industry hopes that the situation will be resolved by the summer, a "key period" for the industry. "People want to travel and are ready to do so on the first plane," she continues. "This alliance between employers and trade unions is a testament to the importance of freedom of travel," says Aerosuisse President, National Councillor Thomas Hurter (UDC/SH). But is it compatible with the desire to make the economy more environmentally friendly after the pandemic? The Climate Strike raises this issue. It considers the air industry's claims "unbearable and incompatible with Switzerland's commitments under the Paris Climate Agreement". By the voice of Anna Lindermeier, climate activists reject what they call "a return to the pre-crisis situation". "Climate is an important element. Aviation wants to help improve it, which is why the companies are acquiring new aircraft and engines," says Thomas Hurter. As a left-wing trade unionist, Daniel Lampart slaloms between the defence of the interests of tens of thousands of employees in the industry and that of the climate. "Switzerland is a small open economy that cannot be cut off from the world. For long distances, there is no alternative to the aeroplane," he argues. The tax on airline tickets, an obstacle? However, one of the instruments of the new climate policy of the Confederation, under the CO2 law, is the introduction of a tax on airline tickets. The Federal Council has specified the modalities of this on Wednesday: it will be 30 francs for short-haul flights, 60 francs for medium-haul flights, 90 francs for long-haul flights, and 30 francs for high-class trips, business or first class trips. Is this supplement not likely to hinder the re-alignment of aviation? "The priority is to connect our country effectively with the rest of the world. If aviation does not recover from the current crisis, no tax can be levied," says Thomas Hurter. "The industry must also benefit from these recipes," adds Rudolf Minsch. At present, 51% of the revenue from the tax is expected to be redistributed to the population and businesses, with the remaining 49% allocated to the future climate fund, a fund which, according to Daniel Lampart, can also be used to finance night trains in Europe.