In Anniviers, the difficult greening of peripheral regions The CO2 law, which is subject to vote in mid-June, will have a greater impact on peripheral regions, in which dependence on cars and oil, for heating, is strong. Example in the valley of Anniviers Grégoire Baur The road winds on mountainside. Of the ones we only meet in Valais. While over the years the work has expanded, some passages remain dizzying in the Anniviers Valley. Between Niouc and Les Pontis, the route seems to be suspended in the void. There is no room for two lanes. However, on average, nearly 3000 vehicles borrow each day. Car-dependent, like the majority of the inhabitants of the peripheral regions, the Anniviards will thus be affected by the CO2 law, which is expected to lead to an increase in the price of fuel. Every day, public transport carries out 11 races from the plain. On average, you have to wait 75 to 90 minutes between two postal buses. This discourages more than one inhabitant from using them. "It must be accepted that individual transport will always be necessary for peripheral regions like ours," says Melly. The president of the municipality of Anniviers adds: "To maintain a life, a school in the valley, we need a minimum population and therefore pendulums who work in Sion or Martigny and who represent about 30% of the assets of the municipality." The car, a necessary comfort Are there Annivors who do not own a private vehicle? David Melly doesn't know anything about it. "Even citizens who pay great attention to the environment have a car," he slips. Located on the terrace of a restaurant in Vissoie, Delphine is part of this fringe of the population. If she admits that she could use public transport, she points out that the car offers some comfort. In some situations, it is still necessary: "If I decide to go to the cinema in Sierre, there is no more bus to go back to the valley once the session is over." On the weekend, the last race starts from the plain at 8:45 pm. In order to form an opinion on the law subject to vote, Delphine calculated the extra cost that acceptance of the text would entail for her. It is estimated at 75 francs per year. More than supermontable, she says. And even if it were to be superior, this "penalty" does not frighten. "I agree to pay more to live in this incredible setting," she says, looking at the surrounding mountains. These peaks attract many tourists throughout the year. In the winter, they visit the ski areas of the valley. The latter will also be affected by the CO2 law, due to diesel used by the ladies. For the Grimentz-Zinal ski lifts, the bill should increase by "some tens of thousands of francs," says director Pascal Bourquin. For the time being, there is no alternative. "We depend on the manufacturers and on the evolution of the engines," says Pascal Bourquin, who sees the first prototypes of the hydrogen lady as a solution for the future. Oil, 20% of Valais' CO2 emissions, will also have an impact in the years, increasing the CO2 tax levied on fuels, also provided for by law. In the valley, fuel oil remains an important source of heat. At the cantonal level too. In Valais, there are 37,000 such facilities, which contribute about 20% of the CO2 emissions. Acceptance of the law may well encourage owners to change these devices. But in the mountains, the deal is a little different. "Climate realities are greatly increasing the cost of fuel oil replacement above 1500 metres above sea level," says Melly. This is especially the case for remote residences in village centres. Because the municipality of Anniviers did not wait for the CO2 law to act on its carbon footprint. The communal buildings are heated by local forest pads. At the bottom of the valley, in Zinal, a remote heating is being created. The commune also unties its stock exchange to encourage its inhabitants to accelerate the energy transition. In mountain regions, directly confronted with climate change, awareness of the problem may be stronger than elsewhere. Since 2004, Anniviers has held a 7.7% stake in the Gougra driving forces, representing a production of 45 million kilowatt hours per year. As much as total consumption in the communal territory. The 4500 hectares of forest, maintained by the commune and the bourgeoisie, allow CO2 to be absorbed twice that produced by the local population. Environmental actions that go unnoticed in the eyes of urban residents, says Melly. Similarities with the Lex Weber and the LAT The Christian Democrat has the impression that the peripheral regions serve as scapegoats for the supporters of the law. Once again. Because David Melly found similarities in the current campaign with the Lex Weber in 2012 and the LAT a year later. "Despite the acceptance of these two texts, Switzerland is still at the same speed. We simply gave ourselves a good conscience by slowing down the pace in the mountains. With the CO2 law, peripheral regions will be penalized, without taking into account their efforts to promote the environment, and generate a flow of money from these regions to urban centres," he regrets. Aware of the need to act, David Melly would prefer it to be done by inducement rather than by obligation. An obligation that could encourage Anniviards to oppose the CO2 law? David Melly isn't sure. If he were to bet today, he would rely on acceptance of the text in his commune, but with his lips. Answered on June 13.