The WWF will discreetly celebrate its 60th anniversary Pandemia obliges, the popular organization will modestly blow its 60 candles. It was founded in Morges and became a multinational environmentalist with 5 million members and 6000 employees ATS The WWF celebrates its 60th anniversary on Thursday in a relative discretion. In addition to an unfavourable health environment, the Gland-based organization (VD) prefers to devote all its energy to its projects on the ground. "There will nevertheless be one or the other wink," says Pierrette Rey, NGO spokesman for French-speaking Switzerland. In particular, she points out that "retro" articles from the 1960s are available in the online shop. To mark the event, the Swiss section will also broadcast a video of its director Thomas Vellacott on Thursday, in which he will answer 60 questions. The latest study of the WWF that we have relayed: The EU, the world's second-largest importer-related deforestation leader A list of successes Without festive events, such as those organised for its 50th anniversary, the WWF wants to value its last great successes. A list was developed for its website, between the creation of a maritime park in Malaysia, the protection of the Amazon and the preservation of the Persian panther in the Caucasus. But rather than focusing on the past, the NGO wants to put the cursor on its current struggles. And there are many of them. In Switzerland, for example, support for the CO2 law is at the top of the list. "This is a crucial chapter in the fight to protect the climate," says Pierrette Rey about the vote on 13 June. Evolution This commitment to climate shows how the organization has evolved in 60 years. At the time of its creation, on 29 April 1961 in Morges, the founders, a group of biologists and businessmen mainly British, wanted to preserve the great fauna in Africa. "From the conservation of certain species, we have moved on to a comprehensive approach, including the defence of forests and seas, climate, energy and agriculture issues," notes Perrette Rey. However, some things have not changed in an organization that was presided over for 15 years (1981-1996) by Prince Philip, who recently died. This is the case with its iconic panda-shaped logo, which has changed very little in six decades. The desire to raise awareness among children also remains at the heart of his mission, including magazines and "nature" camps, which have been organized in Switzerland for many years. "This allows us, in a way, to be part of the family. We thus remain in the heart and spirit of the population," the spokesman notes. Among its other features, the WWF strives, wherever it is on the planet, to find solutions with local actors. This approach distinguishes him from other NGOs with a more offensive style: "We can show our teeth if necessary, but always by being oriented towards finding solutions". No Pandemic Effect In 60 years, WWF has become one of the world's largest environmental organizations. It claims more than 5 million members across the globe and a presence in more than 100 countries with 6,000 collaborators. Some seventeen people work at the international headquarters in Gland. The site underwent a major restructuring in 2016 with the departure of 100 posts to new hubs in Kenya, Singapore and England. Pierrette Rey recalled that the operation was aimed at better distributing forces, especially to the countries of the South. According to her, the siege of Gland is not threatened by new cuts. For its part, the WWF Switzerland is based in Zurich with antennas in Lausanne and Bellinzone. It employs some 250 people, plus more than 6,000 volunteers. In its latest annual report, the Swiss section reported that it had received 8.6 million francs in its 2020 fiscal year from foundations, public institutions, donors and executors. These recipes were not affected by the coronavirus crisis. "At first, we had some fears, but they did not materialize. The evolution of donations remains positive," says Rey.