A liberal yes to the CO2 OPINION law The CO2 law, without being perfect, is a good compromise and a first step towards a climate-neutral Switzerland. Although the lack of measures for certain sectors, such as agriculture or finance, is regrettable, the law has been able to win over all political sides, with the exception of extremes. Moreover, contrary to what some right-wing opponents claim, who suddenly seem to discover a social fibre, it is both climatically and socially just. Climate just because the mechanisms put in place respect the polluter pays principle. A liberal and ecological system that seeks to restore the real cost of the products and services we consume, thus reflecting an incentive logic and allowing both to strengthen investments in critical ecological areas such as the energy transition and to minimize the impact on the purchasing power of households through a system of payment of part of the revenue from the tax. This mechanism of reversal is one of the essential points of this text and guarantees a form of social justice. Today, the Young Liberal Radicals (JLR), whose logic is, as usual, more libertarian and anti-statistical than anything else, join the extreme left in an argumentation which clearly does not understand the mechanisms envisaged and their magnitude or, at least, an incoherent mental gymnastics. With this system, everyone should therefore take responsibility and reduce CO2 emissions. So we should give a few examples to illustrate my remarks. Let's take a family of four, owning a small gasoline car, with which she travels 5,000 kilometers a year. She lives in an apartment of 120 m2, heated with gas, and leaves once a year on a plane trip, less than five hours flight from Switzerland; a relatively average family in sum. Despite what some may think, this family will receive more money than it will spend on taxes. It can expect an additional net gain of 80 francs per year. Similarly, a family of this type who would have decided to replace their air trips with train trips or abandon the car would gain even more. Let us now take another family of four as an example. It is not climate-friendly and is driven in a particularly polluting vehicle and travels 10,000 kilometres per year. She also lives in a large house of 400 m2 also heated by gas. Finally, she travels several times a year by plane, by family, which is also in business class. So here we are talking about an easy and polluting family. It will be able to expect to pay about 1000 francs per year. A relatively painless amount for a well-off family, which will be given back to families with less ecological impact in comparison. Indeed, the idea of this law is above all to reward households that pollute less than average and to charge those who pollute more than average. As we know, well-off households tend to pollute more. This means that, beyond the incentive character, there will be a mathematical redistribution to the lowest incomes if habits do not change. On the contrary, in the event of a change in habits, the effect sought by this law, the impact on purchasing power should be relatively non-existent, regardless of the level of income. The purpose of this law is above all to tackle the climate crisis by integrating environmental costs into our consumption. With this system, it is up to everyone to take charge of their responsibilities and reduce their CO2 emissions. It is therefore necessary to accept this step forward in Swiss climate policy, which will allow us to move forward on other projects in the future, in particular in order to directly address the demand for certain products, the environmental risk management policies of certain companies and in order to invest in an ambitious and indispensable transition. MARC WUARIN COPRESIDENT OF GENEVOUS YOUNG VERTALIBERALS