CO2, the weight of the wallet The revision of the CO2 law will reward those who will use less harmful energy resources and change their heating or car. How much will the bill be for the others? Between supporters and opponents of the reform, the differences are deep Bernard Wuthrich The revision of the CO2 law will not without consequences for people who will not change their heating and mobility habits. The project will reward those who take little or no aircraft, opt for an electric vehicle and do not heat up with fuel oil. The stakes are more pronounced in the peripheral regions – this is reflected in the first surveys. The ecological tax levied since 2008 on oil and natural gas cannot exceed 120 francs per tonne of CO2, or about 30 cents per litre. The amount actually received is 96 francs per tonne of CO2, or 25 cents per litre. In order to encourage owners to favour more environmentally friendly heating (heat pumps, solar, wood, biogas) and to better isolate their housing, the levy will be increased by (four) steps and capped at 210 francs per tonne by 2028. At this date, the additional cost compared to today is estimated to be between 25 and 30 cents per litre. Not to mention the cost of the heating change, which can be subsidized. Between 30 and 120 francs per flight The CO2 tax will not be extended to diesel and gasoline. But the price per litre per column will increase by another channel: compensation is required to import fuels, and importers can pass it on to prices. The law in force sets a maximum amount of 5 cents per litre. The supplement actually paid by motorists is only 1.5 cents. The ceiling will be raised to 10 cents as early as 2022, then to 12 cents as early as 2025. Finally, the revision includes a tax on airline tickets. The Federal Council clarified its intentions in a draft ordinance. Depending on the categories, the increase will be 30 francs (short-haul flights in economy class), 60 francs (short-haul flights in premium economic class, business or first; medium-haul flights in economy class), 90 francs (medium-haul flights in higher class; long-haul flights in economy class) or 120 francs (long-haul flights in higher class). 97 francs more per family How much is it going to cost Swiss households? The Federal Office for the Environment (OFEV) presented an estimate for an average family of four persons. In its calculation, it includes the redistribution of part of the revenue to the population (two thirds of the proceeds of the CO2 tax and 51% of the surcharge on airline tickets, see below). The OFEV is based on various assumptions: average living space of 128 square metres, fuel consumption of 8 litres per square metre, fuel consumption of 6 litres per 100 kilometres, average annual distance of 12?500 kilometres. He concludes that a family that will not change their lifestyle will pay 164 francs more per year to warm up and 53 francs more to travel by car. If only one air trip is made per year, this household will benefit from the redistribution of air tax revenues at a rate of 120 francs per year. In the end, it will pay 97 net more than it does today. "C"est du cinéma" Balivernes, retort the opponents. "The administration figures mislead, in particular the living space taken into account. In a family home in the countryside, the living space is generally much larger," says National Councillor Christian Imark (UDC/SO), who does not spare his efforts or his media appearances to demolish the arguments of the Federal Council. It is based on other references: consumption of 8 litres per 100 km, annual distance of 20,000 km. And each time it retains the maximum amounts defined in the law, for both fuels and fuels. Isn't that exaggerated? "Not at all. It's not a horror scenario. Simonetta Sommaruga also said that the maximum amounts would be applied. His bill of about 100 francs is cinema," he replied. His extrapolation gives a result ten times higher: even after a partial discount, a family of four could pay another 1000 francs a year, he says. "The Time to Change Habits" The Infras office extrapolated the financial consequences of the reform for households in 2018. SonntagsZeitung updated this data. She concludes that a wealthy family with an apartment of 230 square meters and two big cars and who travels several times a year by plane will be able to pay up to 2200 francs more. A middle-class family that makes four short flights each year, heats up with fuel oil and keeps a car will pay another 470 francs by 2030. On the other hand, the same family will be reimbursed 580 francs if it adopts an exemplary climate behavior: no car, no plane, ecological heating. "It is ultimately a question of mentality: the people who produce CO2 will pay, it is true, a little more. It is therefore time to change his habits," argues the advisor to the Damian Müller (PLR/LU) states, who is in favour of reform. He finds Simonetta Sommaruga's numbers credible. By dividing them by twelve, "the monthly extra cost for a family of four is CHF 8.30, thanks to the clever system of reimbursement," he says. We'll see on June 13 that was the most convincing.