In Switzerland, aviation weighs heavily on the climate TRANSPORT The air sector contributes significantly to global warming, especially in a country of great travellers such as Switzerland. A tax on airline tickets could be introduced under the CO2 Act PASCALINE MINET @pascalineminet Are you affected by the shame of flying because of its impact on the climate, or "flygskam" as they say in Sweden, where this phenomenon is common? Or, on the contrary, do you dream of jumping into the first flight that came, as soon as the restrictions related to the Covid-19 pandemic are relaxed? To help you get your idea, we propose to dive into the figures of the climate impact of aviation. New knowledge is prompting an upward review. However, the subject is likely to be fiercely debated in the coming weeks, because in June the vote will be held on the revision of the CO2 law, which provides for the introduction of a text on airline tickets. The climate balance of aviation varies greatly according to the geographical perspective adopted. It is generally estimated that it is responsible for 2 to 3% of global emissions, which is a relatively small proportion of the problem. "But it must be known that less than 20% of the world's population has already taken the plane and that this proportion is expected to grow rapidly," says Yves Chatton of the Transport and Environment Association (ATE). A small number of very diligent travellers A minority of travellers worldwide are thus responsible for the majority of aviation-related programming. According to a study published in 2020 in Global Environmental Change, only 3 to 4% of the world's population made one or more international flights in 2018. Travellers' most diligent – 1% of the world's population – are believed to be responsible for half of aviation emissions. "Data on the distribution of air transport remains scattered, but there is evidence that some countries and individuals contribute disproportionately to air transport emissions," the authors report. However, Switzerland is one of the countries where a lot of aircraft is taken. According to Our World in Data, in 2018, emissions from international aviation averaged 523 kg of CO2 per person in Switzerland. A figure well below some island states, but still twice as high as its neighbours, France and Germany, for example. Such emissions are quickly achieved: a traveller returning from Geneva to Madrid in economy class emits 430 kg of CO2 equivalents, according to the estimates of the Myclimate carbon compensation site. Each person returning from Geneva to New York in the same class emits about 2 tons. Unfortunately, from a climate point of view, these emissions are not anecdotal. According to the Swiss Environment Report 2018 of the Federal Office for the Environment (OFEV), each person should emit a maximum of 600 kg of CO2 per year, so that they can have one in two chances of containing the rise in temperatures below 2 degrees by the end of the century, as foreseen by the Paris Agreement. However, in 2015, Swiss emissions averaged 14 tonnes of CO2 equivalent, 23 times more than the amount to be kept... But let's go back to aviation emissions in Switzerland. What is their climate impact on other sectors of the country? The answer is not easy to find. According to the OFEV greenhouse gas inventory, the transport sector accounts for the largest share of total greenhouse gas emissions (32.4%), followed by industry with 24.3% and construction with 24.2%. In addition to CO2, other reheating substances International transport is not included in this inventory, as it is not included in the Paris Agreement. Domestic flights constitute only a congruous portion (0.12 million tonnes of CO2 per year) of total aviation emissions, compared to international flights (5.74 million tonnes per year, counting only flights from Swiss airports). Adding these two types of flights together, the aviation sector accounts for about 11% of Switzerland's total greenhouse gas emissions. It is already far more than the 2 to 3% at world level. However, these estimates are still well below the actual impact of aviation. They are based solely on the CO2 emissions of aircraft, although it is now known that most of their warming effect comes from other substances. "In addition to CO2, aircraft also emit water vapour and oxides of nitrogen. Water vapour forms in condensation drags and later in the form of cirrus. Their warming effect is about two-thirds greater than that of CO2. Nitrogen oxides have various effects on the concentration of methane and ozone, greenhouse gases. Their warming effect is about half that of CO2. The cooling effect of the sulphur dioxide emitted by aircraft must also be counted. When considered as a whole, the total warming effect of aviation is about 3 times that of CO2 alone," explains climatologist Urs Neu of the Swiss Academy of Natural Sciences SNAT, author of a recent report on the climate impact of air transport. Taking these emissions out of CO2 into account, therefore, makes the already salty climate note of aviation rise sharply. "If we use this multiplier of 3, then we can estimate that aviation actually corresponds to 27% of Switzerland's climate impact, making it the country's main emitter. This should invite us to take it better into account in policies to combat warming," says Yves Chatton of ATE. Some estimates are slightly less. The CO2 Ordinance, currently in consultation, provides for a 2.5 multiplier to be applied to quantify the climate impact of flights. This value must be indicated on the plane tickets to inform the passenger. While the overall effect of aviation on warming is therefore still under discussion, the fact that this sector must contribute to the fight against climate change is not questioned by anyone. "I can't say that all trips from our airport are 100% made in a sustainable spirit. But it seems to me wrong to focus solely on the volume of air travel. The aim must be to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from flights. The industry is working on projects for new engines and alternative fuels, with the aim of achieving carbon neutrality in aviation by 2050," said André Schneider, director of Genève Aéroport. "If we want to meet the objectives of the Paris Agreement and the Federal Council, all solutions must be considered," said Urs Neu. But technical solutions, such as synthetic kerosene, will only be effective in the longer term. Reducing the use of aircraft appears to be the easiest solution to implement quickly. As such, a tax on airline tickets could be an effective measure. This will depend on the conditions used." Change our travel patterns Currently, the tax is 30 francs for short-haul flights, 60 francs for medium-haul flights and 90 francs for long-haul flights, in economy class. "This tax would have a twofold effect, since it will encourage passengers to take less flights, and it will encourage the air sector to develop alternatives. It will be able to recover some of the taxes in the form of research incentives and companies using alternatives will be able to sell their tickets with a reduced tax," says Yves Chatton. Opponents argue that such a tax could lead to a postponement of traffic at neighbouring airports. Most of them (Germany, Austria, France, Italy, etc.) have, however, already introduced an air traffic tax, whether for tax or environmental reasons. Beyond this tax, the current crisis could represent an opportunity to challenge our way of travelling. Prior to the Covid-19 crisis, a threefold increase in air transport demand was expected between 2020 and 2050. Experts believe that the sector should return to growth before the pandemic around 2024 or 2025. "The way in which traffic will resume is not yet clear. It is likely that the number of business trips will decline. For private trips, the whole question is whether it will be cool to go shopping in London for a weekend. In this area, perceptions can change very quickly," says Urs Neu. "The studies carried out by airlines with their customers indicate that there is a great deal of impatience to be able to travel again after the pandemic," said André Schneider.