To leave, TGV Lyria relies on telework in the EXCLUSIVE train. The subsidiary of SNCF and SBB lost two thirds of its turnover during the pandemic. At the time of restarting, and in the face of competition from the aircraft and the car, TGV Lyria puts forward the ecological side of the train and the possibility of using the time of the journey to work Bernard Wuthrich Mobility restarts. The SBBs announce the return to normal at stations and trains. Airports and airlines are preparing the ground to welcome passengers again. TGV Lyria, the subsidiary of SNCF and SBB, which provides connections between Switzerland and Paris, is also moving. The pandemic cost him dearly, according to Time's director, Fabien Soulet: for 2020, the loss of turnover amounts to 200 million euros, i.e. almost two thirds of the 320 million recorded in a normal year and the number of travellers fell between 2019 and 2020 from 5 million to 2.3 million. "Like transport in general, we were very hard hit by the crisis. We'll also lose this year. Thanks to partial unemployment, especially in France but also in Switzerland, we have been able to reduce costs. TGV Lyria has been well supported by its two shareholders, who are going through the same crisis and have a very strong confidence in our model. The recovery is there, the desire for travel is back. Our offer was picked up at one in two trains in May and will rise to two out of three at the beginning of July. And we have the firm intention of going to get market share from our air competitors," he says. Two trends that have been reinforced TGV Lyria has a dual advantage in the time to restart: the ecological advantage of rail transport and the possibility of using the journey time to (tele)work. Before the pandemic, the company commissioned a study at the Zurich office in Infras to calculate the carbon footprint of travel between Switzerland and France. His conclusions fall at a very opportune time. "The survey investigates the energy needed to travel a person by train, plane, bus, thermal car or electric car. The aim is to quantify certain characteristics of the train journey against its competitors, including air. Already before the crisis, two strong trends emerged: the environmental awareness of travellers and businesses, which increased further during the pandemic, as well as an increased demand for comfort and wifi equipment on board," explains Fabien Soulet. The train would be better than the electric car. The study includes several criteria: travel time, CO2 load of the trip itself, CO2 load of the life cycle (from manufacturing to disposal) of the materials used, CO2 load of the infrastructure. Unsurprisingly, the TGV is at the top of the ranking, especially for CO2 emissions per passenger and per trip Geneva-Paris: 5.2 kilos in TGV, compared to 98 by plane, 19 by bus, 93 by thermal car and 42 by electric car. The overall energy balance is 3.1 kg in oil equivalent per passenger and per journey for the TGV, 29 kg for the aircraft, 4.2 kg for the bus, 19 kg for the fuel-powered car and 5.4 kg for the electric car. Infras further notes that 73% of the polluting emissions of TGV Lyria come from the manufacture, maintenance and disposal of infrastructure and vehicles. In contrast, more than 80% of the CO2 emitted by an aircraft comes from the consumption of kerosene. More surprising, high-speed trains rank better than electric cars. "The magic of the train is twofold: it emits little CO2 but also shows a great energy sobriety throughout the entire production and operation process. It is superior to the electric car for two reasons. On the rail, friction is limited, unlike tires, which are made to hang on the road. And we can get a lot more people on a train than on a plane and, of course, in a car," says Fabien Soulet. The main purpose of the competition for the video conference L'étude d'Infras was to assess the working time available during travel. The TGV comes to mind, which is not surprising. It is possible to work "for 83% of the journey time, compared with less than 35% by plane" and, unless you are a passenger with a driver, 0% by car. Certainly, the length of the journey is longer by rail than by air: a Geneva-Paris is done in 245 minutes by TGV compared to 169 by plane, 315 by car and 545 by bus, according to Infras. But TGV Lyria believes that it can be usefully compensated by working on board and using the free wifi installed in all travel classes. Aiming for business people The Franco-Swiss society does not hide it: this aspect of the survey is clearly aimed at attracting, while respecting the prevailing sanitary conditions, business travellers, whom the airlines also try to conquer again. "The pandemic has shown that business men and women no longer want to waste their time in transport, otherwise they will no longer hesitate to turn to videoconferencing, which is a new competitor. Being able to use your time to work is more important than the length of the journey. This awareness strengthens the competitiveness of our offer," Fabien Soulet analyses. And the introduction of a tax on airline tickets provided for in the CO2 law, on which the Swiss vote this Sunday, 13 June, would further increase the attractiveness of the train.