A thousand cost-effective solutions for the climate ENVIRONMENT The Solar Impulse Foundation has certified 1,000 lucrative solutions to combat warming. Next step: to provide a tailor-made selection to heads of state around the world RACHEL RICHTERICH @Rrichterich The line seems inexhaustible. Among the 1000 climate solutions identified by the Solar Impulse Foundation and publicly presented on Tuesday, we find Joulia. This device designed in Biel is mounted on the shower flow and allows to recover the heat of the used water to preheat the water inlet pipes that will come out of the head – energy savings that represent for a household of four people equivalent to that produced annually by 15 m2 of solar panels. The Ticino company Bioma has been awarded certification for its product Kopros, a mixture of enzymes and bacteria sprayed on the litter of farmed animals to eliminate ammonia and methane emissions. There is also Antismog, a hydrogen housing designed in Paris, which adapts to all types of vehicles to increase fuel combustion and thus reduce to 80% the rate of unburned gases and particles that are now released. Or Deinking, a process developed in Spain to remove ink and pigments in plastic, in order to obtain a secondary material similar to virgin plastic and thus facilitate its recycling. Some of the solutions now stamped with the Foundation's label are at the start-up stage, even the prototype stage, and are looking for investors, others are already being marketed on a large scale and are aiming for new markets. "Of course, all of them have in common to be good for the planet. But also to be profitable," says Bertrand Piccard, president of Solar Impulse, in an interview granted to Time. It is also this last point which distinguishes its label from the multitude of other environmental certifications. And that's the axis on which the explorer articulates his fight. "The idea sprouted in 2015, at the Paris Conference on Climate Change (COP21) where I was invited. Seeing the slowness of the processes and the strong resistance around a goal shared by all parties – that of halting global warming – I sought to present the situation differently: not as a problem, but as an opportunity to make a profit," recalls the one who, in addition to his explorer's cap, is also a psychiatrist. "These 1000 solutions are proof of this." They cover the water, energy, construction, mobility, industry and agriculture sectors. In total, a team of 40 employees (35 full-time equivalents) worked to select them for more than four years, supported by more than 400 independent experts from around the world. "Each case was submitted to three researchers and specialists, who, on a gratuitous basis, screened them for standards and certifications in their field of expertise," says Bertrand Piccard. Is it true that you're dealing with the enemy? The operation, with an annual budget of 5 million francs, is financed by 16 private and institutional partners. Among them are multinationals regularly in the focus of environmental NGOs, including the veveysan giant of Nestlé agri-food, the French airline Air France, or the specialist in oil extraction Schlumberger, who is taxed in the Caribbean. The latter was also awarded the label for a low-depth geothermal installation for buildings in urban areas. Bertrand Piccard does not see any contradiction: "I pursue the same goal as environmental activists, but with pragmatism." These companies have the money, the ability and the responsibility to act, it makes sense to ask them to participate in the efforts, he believes. For him, no risk of greenwashing, "as soon as these solutions are aimed at using and producing more efficient technologies". In addition, some partners have tapped into this portfolio of investment solutions. For example, Nestlé, which has partnered with MIWA, a young Czech company specializing in bulk sales systems, for brands of soluble coffee and animal feed. Bertrand Piccard was able to hold his bet: technically, solutions exist and make money. Will he be able to count on his powerful private partners to bring the fight to the political level? Have they committed themselves to releasing pressure from lobbyists to promote "modernization of legal frameworks", as he calls it? "Yes, and I want proof of the manifestos co-signed with our partners to ask governments for more ambitious environmental and energy regulations." Commitments made in his view "because environmental technologies have become profitable, but also to avoid distortion of competition with other companies that would not play the game of the ecological transition". A personalized roadmap Convincing the heads of state will be his next mission, through a vast tour of the world during which Bertrand Piccard will give them a "cleanprint", a kind of turnkey roadmap, listing a personalized selection of solutions. These are the tools to bridge "the legislative gap, which creates inefficiency and waste. Pollution remains legal, which hinders the introduction of modern technologies into the market," he points out. Hence the need to introduce ambitious carbon taxes, which would improve the profitability and competitiveness of enterprises. In Switzerland, for example, he pleaded in favour of the CO2 law, which would be put to the vote of the people in June. A kick-off in November in Glasgow, where the 26th annual UN Climate Conference will be held, if health conditions permit.