You have written to us about... the City of Music, the initiatives concerning agriculture and the CO2 law Mail continues to be very plentiful about the choices that will be made on June 13. Are clean water and synthetic pesticides free Switzerland extreme initiatives? And would Geneva not miss her chance, without a Cité de la musique worthy of her reputation? Finally, a former physics professor compiled a whole series of arguments in favour of the revised CO2 law Hyperlink Work is wages! Prof. Roland J. Campiche, Saint-Légier-La Chiésaz (VD) "In the past, we used to say work is health! The article by Emmanuel Gaerssus entitled "The Romands work less in retirement than the Germans", in Le Temps of 28 April 2021 and referring to the study carried out by Swiss Life is extremely enlightening. Thus, would only pensioners in paid employment work? Linking work and wages is therefore the dominant concept. We are already quite far from the definition that can be read in Le Petit Robert: "All the coordinated human activities to produce... which is useful." That farmers, architects, artists, executives... continue to pursue their profession beyond retirement age by being paid is not unexpected. But if retired lawyers or bankers come to the service of an NGO or a voluntary social service, the actors or visitors who regularly go to an EMS to carry out an animation activity, the grandparents who each day take care of their grandchildren – the OFS estimated in 2016 the economy thus achieved to more than 8 billion – the researchers who continue their work by paying themselves the costs induced, they turn their thumbs? It is a pity that Swiss Life's investigation ignored them, because it is thus induced the idea or rather the stereotype that, past the Rubicon of retirement, the societal utility of the individual dissolves. The consequences are immediate. The frequent look at the "old" during the pandemic is an illustration of this. The reluctance to provide seniors with the means to receive training tailored to their needs is another. Seeing work above all as a service to the community remains an asset for life in society." La Cité de la musique, a 21st century project indispensable in Geneva Olivier Peitrequin, Gingins (VD) "Je voir révénier réviser les divers articles que Le Temps a publié sur la future Cité de la musique à Genève. This project was the subject of a referendum and the people will vote on 13 June next. What do we see? What are the stakes? Currently, a beautiful 19th-century property with a nice house surrounded by a rich arborization. For the little story, it has housed in its time the Russian composer Scriabine. In the future, if the project takes shape, a Cité de la musique will take place, including a modern concert hall, worthy of a world-renowned orchestra, the OSR, and the headquarters of the Haute Ecole de musique (HEM). The Victoria Hall, despite its excellent acoustics, is not suitable for the size of a symphonic orchestra and the HEM is narrow in scattered premises. A necessary project for a metropolis whose attractiveness far exceeds the borders of the city Whatever the opponents say, it is a 21st century project necessary for a metropolis like Geneva, whose attractiveness far exceeds the borders of the city. He is called an "elitist." Is the HEM elitist? The disappearance of the villa cannot be opposed to such an ambitious and innovative programme. As for the trees that will disappear, new plantations will certainly be born on another site. The large investment of 300 million francs on the cake is ensured by private funds – fortunate the city can host such a potential for patronage... The operating costs will be borne by the community. It's up to her to make sure they're contained." Twice no! Francis Egger, Vice-Director of USP, Swiss Union of Peasants "Extreme. This word alone summarizes the clean water and synthetic pesticides-free Switzerland initiatives on which we will vote on 13 June. The reasons for the categorical rejection by the agricultural world are too often ignored in the media, some of which prefer to echo the anxiogenic allegations of the initiates. These two initiatives focus heavily on agricultural production with disproportionate and inapplicable requirements. Tolerating only farm fodder demonstrates how disproportionate the Clean Water initiative is. Some farms, the most intensive ones, would then turn away from direct payments, which will benefit neither better protection of our environment nor our already excellent drinking water quality. Moreover, there is no unity of subject matter between these two initiatives and we could find ourselves, in the event of a favourable vote, confronted with implementation in a very random legal form, giving satisfaction to no one and reminding us of recent achievements of initiatives. With the efforts already made and still to be undertaken, agriculture is aware of societal expectations. In this sense, on 21 March Parliament agreed to implement a parliamentary initiative by amending three laws: the Chemicals Act, the Agriculture Act and the Water Protection Act. The Federal Council will consult the enforcement orders during the summer and all will come into force in early 2023. These adaptations have the advantage over initiatives not only to be limited to the agricultural sector, but also to include all plant protection products, not only synthetic plant protection products, but also pesticides admitted into organic form. In contrast to the two initiatives that are limited to the introduction of production constraints, this new pesticide legislation also sets specific targets for the loss of fertilizers and risks in the use of plant protection products. The implementation of the new provisions will be a huge challenge, not only for the agricultural production sector, but also for the entire agri-food sector. Switzerland will have through these legal adaptations the strictest pesticide legislation in Europe. Agriculture therefore takes responsibility for preserving our resources while ensuring that the population is adequately supplied, at a time when almost half of the content of our bases is already dependent on imports. There are so many reasons to vote twice no on 13 June." The CO2 law for skeptics Pr. Dr Hubert Kirrmann, Im Rüteli (AG) "The CO2 law is used to reduce fossil fuel consumption. 1) Even those who deny that global warming is due to CO2 must admit that fossil fuels are being depleted. All the large oil fields have already exceeded their maximum. For air and sea transport, for industry (metallurgy, cement, chemistry, etc.), there is no substitute for fossil fuels in the near future. The CO2 law helps to preserve these resources. 2) Those who defend Switzerland's independence must admit that much of the oil and natural gas comes from belligerent countries that could put pressure on Switzerland. The CO2 law reduces this dependency. 3) Those who refuse subsidies must admit that Switzerland subsidizes fossil fuels (pendulum allowances, aviation fuel, tractors, etc.) more than any other energy source. The CO2 law saves subsidies for national energy sources. (4) Those who consider that the CO2 tax is too high must admit that it will not exceed CHF 0.12 per litre. In addition, the CO2 law requires that new cars consume less, so that the car will be cheaper than today. 5) Those who still make fun of solar and wind energy must admit that the CO2 law strengthens hydro and nuclear energy in their competition with expensive gas power plants. Because renewable energy will not be able to replace nuclear power plants in a timely manner, and electricity from vehicles and heat pumps must come from somewhere. We cannot count on our neighbours, even if the framework agreement was to be signed. (6) Those who rely on the capture and sequestration of CO2 should admit that for each kilo of imported fuel, some 2.5 kg of CO2 should be disposed of. Finding a repository for radioactive waste is a child's play compared to burying millions of tons of CO2 each year. The CO2 law reduces the difficulty a little."