François Launaz: "Motorists are milk cows of the CO2 law" The automotive and oil lobby is fighting the revision of the CO2 law. For the president of the importers, this one is "punitive" and is mainly intended to raise money that will not benefit those who have to use the car Bernard Wuthrich The automotive and oil sectors are fighting the revision of the CO2 law. The President of Auto-Swiss, François Launaz, explains why importers do not want it. Time: Does the CO2 law not anticipate the announced end of oil? François Launaz: Yes, but the car manufacturers also anticipate. More and more brands are announcing that there will be more new generation of combustion engines from 2030 onwards. They will be replaced by electric propulsions and possibly also hydrogen. Our industry has already launched a decarbonisation process. Despite the crisis, the share of electric cars is increasing among new registrations: in one year, it has increased from 21 to 37%. Why then do you not support the CO2 law since it is going in your direction? We could support it if the motorists were not the milk cows who will have to pay for their more expensive petrol but will receive almost nothing in return. Traffic accounts for 35% of CO2 emissions. It is a reality that we do not dispute. And I support the polluter pays principle. The climate fund promises a lot of money to a lot of people, but apart from a few speccadilles for battery charging stations, car owners will not get anything. On the other hand, we're going to puncture them to develop night trains, for example. That's not fair. The installation of charging stations is not nothing, is it? The fund plans to allocate 60 million francs to a range of measures, including the installation of these charging stations. In the end, we're only going to spend 5 to 10 million. They're peanuts. It would take 60 to 70 million per year for these stations alone, at a rate of about 1500 francs per unit. That's what I asked in a letter to Simonetta Sommaruga. Moreover, if incentive taxes work, the fund's budget will go down one day to zero. And there'll be no more money for anyone. Does the oil and automobile lobby not cling to its achievements by fighting the CO2 law? I don't think so. The reason for the referendum is to reject a punitive law that costs too much and does not sufficiently support the decarbonization of mobility. We agree with the planned CO2 emission targets, which are currently 95 grams per kilometre and will gradually decrease to zero by 2040 or 2050. But we need support. We agree to replace cars using fuel with electric vehicles. But they cost more to buy because of the batteries. Europe understood it well. It does more to force building owners to install charging stations for their tenants and to encourage motorists to buy an electric vehicle. Is your opposition not motivated by the increase in the price of gasoline from 10 to 12 cents per litre? We agreed with 8 cents per litre, provided that these recipes benefit the ecological transition of mobility. I would like to add something that is never mentioned: the project plans to divert some of the tax revenues currently used to finance mobility infrastructure in cities and agglomerations to the climate fund. This diversion is counterproductive, since, to absorb population growth, we need these investments in infrastructure. These 10 to 12 cents will be paid by importers to offset the purchase of fuel. Will they be fully passed on to column prices? According to the experts, the maximum levy will be necessary from the first day to cover the obligation to compensate for fuel emissions over the entire period up to 2030. It will necessarily be passed on to prices. How much will the CO2 law cost an average family? I don't want to get into a number quarrel. Simonetta Sommaruga says it will cost 100 francs a year, opponents announced an amount of 1000 francs. On average, the truth will lie somewhere between these two extremes. But I think that the averages per person do not reflect the reality for the population anyway: the law will certainly cost households much more with two cars and a heating oil. Some of the taxes will be reimbursed to the public and businesses. Isn't that a fair measure? I find it hard to understand this mechanism. This will be done through health insurance premiums. It is therefore a cross-cutting subsidy that demonstrates the inability of the political world to solve the problem of health costs. It is aberrant to think that a reduction of 60 to 80 francs per year on health insurance premiums could alter the behaviour of the population in terms of mobility or heating. In addition, not all members of the Federal Council have a low CO2 function vehicle. Before they want to tax the population, they should set an example. The Federal Council claims that the CO2 law is a social reform. Are you in dispute with that argument? On the one hand, I do not see what is social to repay the same amount to a billionaire as to a modest taxpayer. And on the other hand, this law will clearly have antisocial effects for people and SMEs dependent on the car. In a context of crisis, it is not reasonable to tax lower incomes and small businesses more.