Swiss prepares post-pandemic The air sector is now facing a structural crisis. The diagnosis is made by the company, which draws the conclusions: it intends to eliminate 1,700 jobs and reduce its fleet by 15%. Some 700 layoffs could be pronounced Aline Bassin "The next world will not be the same as before the pandemic."A year and a half after the start of the health crisis, Swiss acknowledged the profound changes that the new coronavirus has brought about for its sector of activity. The airline's managers have made it clear by presenting their restructuring plan to the press on Thursday. Dieter Vranckx, director of Lufthansa Group's subsidiary, said that the situation remains "difficult" and "extended", but that the crisis is now mainly "structural". In order to adapt to this new situation, Swiss plans to eventually eliminate 1,700 jobs, or 20% of its workforce. According to society, natural departures will not be enough to achieve this goal. Up to 780 dismissals could be pronounced. Cabin personnel are most affected with 400 jobs at risk, twice as much as those working on the ground. The geographical distribution of this resizing is not specified, nor are the destinations that could charge for it. We are still burning 2 million cash a day Markus Binkert, the financial manager of Swiss Car the company also plans to reduce its fleet – which has 90 aircraft – by around 15%, mainly through the withdrawal of some Airbus. On short and medium-haul routes, the number of aircraft should be reduced from 69 to 59, while it would increase from 31 to 26 on long-haul routes. The aim of this reduction is to save half a billion francs by 2023. "We still burn 2 million francs of cash a day," says Markus Binkert, the company's financial director. To achieve a neutral balance sheet, the company should exploit 50 to 55% of its capacity. It was far from this threshold at the beginning of the year: at the end of April, when its quarterly results were published, it indicated that it was operating only at a quarter of its pre-pandemic level. As a result, the airline lost 201 million francs in the first three months of the year. Its turnover fell by 67.5% over a year to CHF 299.6 million. According to his managers, partial unemployment is no longer a remedy for the worst crisis since the start of the company in 2002. "We have to prepare the company for the future," Dieter Vranckx stressed at a press conference. Maintaining its investment capacity, as well as its ability to repay the credits granted during the pandemic." Swiss and Edelweiss companies benefit from a guarantee of 1.3 billion francs from the Confederation. The airline ensures that its restructuring plan does not contravene the commitments made to receive these support. Demand down by 20% Preparing the company in the future is dealing with a permanently weakened demand. Pointing to the fall in business travel, the company is planning to drop attendance by 20% in 2023, compared to 2019. "The phenomenon is very problematic," confirms Andreas Wittmer, head of the air sector study centre at the University of Saint-Gallen, "because business travel is massively financing global traffic: this category of passengers is willing to use the business class and often makes their bookings in the very short term, which is worth higher fares." Together with his team, he is completing a study in collaboration with the airline to better understand the change in the behaviour of this type of passenger. Part-time and early retirement The representatives of the various trades have learned the news without surprise, but they intend to fight to limit the damage during the consultation phase which runs until 25 May. "The problem," said Sandrine Nikolic-Fuss, president of the cabin crew union, "is that our sector has already made a great deal of sacrifices since the beginning of the pandemic." She refers to wage concessions, sabbatical leave or early retirement. In his view, only in the latter category can solutions be found to reduce the 400 dismissals envisaged in stewards and air stewardesses. A company like Swiss should do everything possible to save its jobs first Sandrine Nikolic-Fuss, president of the cabin staff union For the staff representative, Swiss should first stop any delegation of flights to Helvetic that is not part of the Lufthansa alliance: "A company like Swiss should do everything to save its jobs first before keeping it in a company that offers minimum working conditions compared to what is happening in the industry." Negotiations also bogged down with the pilots. In principle, they are protected from dismissal by 2023 by their collective labour agreement, but Swiss law does not protect them from such an outcome. Spokesperson for Aeroopers, who represents the interests of the profession, Thomas Steffen wants to promote part-time work to avoid the 120 dismissals envisaged. "At Edelweiss, some pilots have a fixed day off each week. It is this type of solution that we would like to put in place." Asked about this, Swiss management did not close the door, pointing out that one of its four development axes was precisely dedicated to new ways of working. Sustainability for another challenge The decline in professional travel is not the only trend change Swiss faces since the airline sector needs to reduce its carbon footprint. "The measures taken to reduce CO2 emissions are also likely to have a negative impact on demand," said expert Andreas Wittmer. The company is also not satisfied with the arrangements provided for by the Confederation, on which the population pronounces itself on 13 June. If he is in favour of any action that improves the situation in this area, Swiss's boss considers the CO2 enforcement order "counterproductive" for his sector. According to Dieter Vranckx, the taxes levied on airline tickets are to be used to finance aviation initiatives. He said he was in close discussion with Confederation on this matter.