Is the carbon tax fair? OPINION. The debate should not focus on the tax itself, because it is an indispensable tool to preserve our environment, but on how to best redistribute the tax proceeds, Kenza Benhima, Mathieu Grobéty, Aleksandra Malova and Simon Scheidegger, from HEC-Unil Kenza Benhima, HEC-Unil, CREA Institute Mathieu Grobéty, CREA Institute Aleksandra Malova, HEC-Unil Simon Scheidegger, HEC-Unil Is the carbon tax fair? It is a question that cannot be answered completely without recalling its role. This is to correct a market failure. When we buy goods and services, we pay for production costs. But there are also hidden costs. The carbon dioxide (CO2) produced by humans causes global warming with potentially catastrophic consequences. In the absence of a tax, therefore, the real cost of production, which in fact should include such damage, is not paid. From this point of view, it is the market that is unfair and the tax that is fair. However, it is important to consider the impact of the tax on individuals. There is no doubt that the tax will affect households in an unequal manner. While consumption of goods and services that contribute most to CO2 emissions increases with income, the share of these goods and services is higher for modest revenues (except for aviation). These households may feel the effect of the carbon tax more strongly than others. According to the Federal Statistical Office, a Swiss household with an income of less than 13?622 francs spends 1% of the latter on average on energy from its home, while the latter accounts for more than one sixth of the greenhouse gas emissions in Switzerland. This share is 3% for households with an income of less than 4914 francs. Is the carbon tax unfair, however? What is unfair or not First of all, the impact of the carbon tax depends on the existence of alternatives to taxed goods and services. If these alternatives are taken into account, their impact is less. The increase in the price of plane tickets does not mean the end of the holidays, nor that holidays will necessarily cost more! This only means that we will travel more often by train, and less far. Savings can even be made, for example, by heating a house with a heat pump instead of a heating oil. Of course, it takes time and money to change the heating system. Finally, the state takes one hand and gives the other back However, even in this case, it is not the tax itself that should be considered unfair, because unless it is distorted, it cannot correct these effects. Rather, it is the tax system as a whole to do so. This is possible thanks to revenues from the CO2 tax, which provides a "double dividend": it not only helps to improve society by changing behaviour harmful to the climate, but it also generates a financial manna that can reward virtuous acts and correct inequalities due to the tax. The modest households will receive more.It is therefore the details of the CO2 law on which the Swiss people are required to vote on 13 June that will determine whether or not the carbon tax is fair. What about it? The revenue from the tax will have two main uses: to accompany the transition to a greener economy and to redistribute the money collected to households. Will this help to limit the impact of the tax on modest households? Absolutely. In part, the income from the household tax will be distributed equitably, meaning that modest households will receive more in proportion to their income. Second, using these resources to encourage the adoption of green technologies also allows households to be less affected by the tax. This happens, for example, when a family installs a heat pump with climate fund subsidies, which avoids paying the fuel oil tax. So finally the state takes one hand and gives back the other. In conclusion, the debate should not focus on the tax itself, because it is an indispensable tool to preserve our environment, an invaluable resource for future generations, but on how to best redistribute the tax proceeds to make them as fair as possible.