Reflections by a liberal Green on plant health initiatives and the CO2 OPINION law. On June 13, the people will be called to vote on two social projects, writes the Vaudian Green MEP Claude-Alain Gebhard. Their objectives are perfectly commendable and realistically applicable. But it takes more time for Claude-Alain Gebhard, Green MEP at the Grand Conseil Vaudois We must take a position on the CO2 law adopted by Parliament on 25 September, which aims, in agreement with the implementation of the Paris Agreements, to reduce greenhouse gases by 50% by 2030 and an ambitious goal of achieving carbon neutrality by 2050. Surprisingly, this virtuous project is contested by referendum both by the UDC and by the ultra-ecologists, which seems rather suspicious as the arguments diverge... We will also have to decide on two initiatives, called "phytosanitary", aiming with some well-known differences to reach an agricultural production free of chemicals within eight to ten years. These agronomic objectives are theoretically possible for Switzerland, proof of this is organic production with its organic label Bourgeon, which perfectly meets these conditions. "We are already doing this," says Bio Suisse, the national federation of organic farming. However, organic production is currently practised only by 16% of Swiss farmers, the vast majority of mountain farmers who do not use any plant protection products because they are not necessary for their farms mainly herbariums because of the altitude. One or the other of these two initiatives, if accepted by the double majority of citizens and cantons, would require 84% of Swiss farmers to comply almost with the organic specifications in eight to ten years, which seems extremely short in relation to the deadlines of the CO2 law. Liberticide initiatives This project could nevertheless be perfectly feasible in a longer time and without going through these perfectly liberticid initiatives for a large majority of our peasants. Indeed, with an increase in the organic market share of around 16% per year and even 19% in 2020 under the impetus of the pandemic, we would reach at the current rate of almost 100% in less than 20 years. This slower pace would also have the immense advantage of allowing the market and our consumers to adapt progressively to the natural conversion of Swiss agriculture and society to organic. Indeed, this virtuous evolution will inevitably significantly increase the household basket, and this is all the more so if we force this evolution by putting pressure on agriculture, already so often unjustly stigmatized...This project could be perfectly achievable within a longer period of time A longer period will also better guarantee the maintenance of our food security, which was praised to more than 78% by the people on 27 September 2017. According to the FiBL (Research Station for Organic Agriculture), organic agriculture currently produces 20 to 30% less food than conventional agriculture. This lack of productivity should, however, be overcome in twenty to twenty-five years with massive investments in farmers' training and innovative agronomic research to develop organically-adapted plant varieties with greater resistance to diseases and pests. We can even imagine that organic agriculture and refinanced agronomic research can offer new jobs in our country in the future and thus respond to the loss of jobs in the tertiary sector, which shows serious signs of regression. The objectives of the CO2 law and of these two phytosanitary initiatives are perfectly commendable and realistically applicable. They can even generate jobs and added values, without losing food security if they are part of a realistic agenda and involve the entire economy. For this reason, without formally rejecting these ambitious company plans, I will vote yes to the CO2 law and twice not against plant health initiatives.