On 21 May, the convergence of the struggles will seize Switzerland Large-scale demonstrations are announced throughout the country at the end of the month. Heirites of the Climate Strike, "all demands" will be welcome Boris Busslinger It could be complicated to ride in town next May 21. Announced this Monday by the collective "Grève pour l'avenir", national events bringing together dozens of associations, trade unions and collectives will be held in Switzerland on that day. With this common goal: "Debate political inaction in the face of the climate crisis." However, this will not be the only message conveyed by the demonstrators, who will protest more widely against the entire "imperialist and capitalist patriarchal domination system". A rather fuzzy message Geneva, Lausanne, Zurich, Lucerne and even Vaduz: on 21 May Switzerland and Liechtenstein will wrestle with processions and flags claiming. As a child of the Climate Strike, the Strike for the Future abandons the environmental monothematic to sweep wide. At the end of May – besides the climate – caregivers, women, intersex, non-binary, trans, kneeling people or refugees will be honored. The Unia union will also beat the pavement, in solidarity with its comrades, and carry a clear message against the revision of the AVS and for a strong public service. What exactly will the Strike for the Future send out? The manifesto of the event states: "The exploitation of nature and human beings induced by blind economic growth, patriarchy and imperialism prevent the advent of a just, democratic and sustainable society." Here are the bases. However, according to the text, "each group, each collective, each organization can strike for its own reasons and demands" – "but the environment remains at the centre of the concerns," says one spokesperson. We will be voting on a fundamental climate issue in the near future: the CO2 law. Denied for its lack of ambition by certain Romance branches of the Climate Strike, what does the Strike say for the future? "We have no position on the political-institutional projects," explains one of his spokespersons. "It is a matter of regaining decision-making power together. But we don't have all the solutions in our hands."