In the countryside, the temptation to vote 5xnon In the agricultural world, heated by the two anti-pesticidal initiatives, many could refuse all the objects that were put to the vote on Sunday in order to manifest their anger. A "swimming" reflex that directly threatens the CO2 law Yan Pauchard They will certainly be many to slip a 5xnon into the ballot box on Sunday. As a slogan for these federal votes of 13 June, the formula resonates increasingly in the agricultural world. Heated by both anti-pesticidal initiatives, many are ready to reject all objects in order to manifest their anger. "We often hear farmers say they will refuse everything," says Nicolas Kolly, UDC Group Leader at the Grand Conseil Fribourg. Another canton and another political side, the finding is similar. President of the Vert·es Vaudois, Alberto Mocchi "sees this 5xno appear increasingly, especially on social networks". "The two plant initiatives are a break, they are experienced in the countryside as a direct attack," observes the future trustee of the village of Daillens, in Gros-de-Vaud, a region where "the debates about these objects are extremely tense." The emotion is indeed strong. "Many peasants are shocked by the attitudes and comments of some politicians who have not hesitated to claim that they were sowing death in their fields," said the Friburgish national councillor Pierre-André Page, a farmer by profession, in the Glâne. On the side of the supporters of the two texts, the adviser to the Neuchâtel states Céline Vara for her part regrets that, in recent months, the Federal Council has made "alarmist comments on the consequences in case of acceptance of the two anti-pesticidal initiatives, by eluciating the benefits that our country can have by doing without these products and by affluent people already under pressure from the pandemic". Consequences for the CO2 Act? Neuchâtel is concerned about the consequences of these stresses, in particular, on the outcome of the CO2 law, which, despite broad political support, sees the "yes" being eroded in the polls. "Friends falsely denounce an ecological project while it is a compromise supported by the PLR and the Centre," notes Céline Vara, who notes that her colleagues from the right centre find it difficult to convince their base. The last few weeks have been challenging. The nerves are alive. After death threats, Céline Vara asked for police protection. "I had never experienced anything like this," he admits. "The campaign has gone wrong. Clearly. On both sides", deplores the Friburgish PLR Councillor Jacques Bourgeois, who calls for "a cold head". "We must go beyond the feeling of saying "we will show them" and look at each object calmly," continues the former director of the Swiss Farmers' Union, who pleads in particular for the yes to the CO2 law, "which remains an incentive law": "Farmers have every interest in it, because they will be the first victims of global warming that will impact their crops." Rejection also in the cities For Kevin Grangier, the president of the Vaudian UDC, this opposition reflex is not unique to the peripheral regions but also affects the cities. "I was able to see several calls to vote 5Xnon on open billboards in Lausanne," he says. The explanation is a certain general rejection of what comes from the state. "Everything accumulates," he analyses. A law that will significantly increase the price of gasoline, thus restricting freedom of movement, a law that is absolved against the background of health measures and controversy on the vaccine passport, or a law against terrorism that is not certain that it will not be used to monitor a climate activist or a person deemed to be a plottist." Green National Councillor Christophe Clivaz also sees "a clear driving effect between the five objects although their problem is different". For Valaisan, this refusal reflex cannot be explained without taking into account the context of the Covid-19. "Five objects of voting, that's already a lot. They're complicated to understand. After a year of pandemics, the population is tired and tired of the various restrictions. It's simple to finally say no to everything. It is a pity when it is urgent to take measures in favour of the climate." On the margins of society During these votes, "a Neinsager temptation" is possible, in the eyes of political scientist Pascal Sciarini, among farmers "formerly protected and who feel abandoned today". But also in other spheres. In his view, a context of great uncertainty always introduces a bias favouring the status quo. The professor of the University of Geneva remains cautious about the consequences on the final result of the elections, which he believes is only within a margin of society: "The covid law or the law on police measures to combat terrorism should not be pre-tested, but it is certain that the CO2 law is the most fragile."