On the revision of the CO2 law, economic camps far from being homogeneous With the exception of the TCS, the oil and road lobby is fighting the revision of the law. Economic organizations are shared. On the left, some climate strikers reject the law, believing that it does not go far enough Bernard Wuthrich The revision of the CO2 law opposes camps that are not homogeneous. The majority of the large umbrella associations have chosen the one that supports the new law. This committee includes Economiesuisse and 36 branches, such as Swiss Banking, the Swiss Company of Entrepreneurs (SSE), Swiss Textiles, the Association of Swiss Electric Enterprises (AES) or the Swiss Insurance Association (SAA). Companies are also committed to the revision: Novartis, Siemens, IKEA, BKW, Alpiq and Axpo, among others. "We are not satisfied with all aspects of the law, such as the climate fund. But it is an acceptable compromise that prompts us to slip a yes of reason into the urn. It's better to act now than to wait. A refusal would imply a return of several years", explains the director of Economiesuisse, Monika Rühl. In front of this camp stands a sling of opposition made up of other economic actors. It is led by the oil and automotive industry, with the notable exception of the TCS, which has decided to support the revision of the CO2 law. Opposition of the oil and automotive lobby The opposition committee includes Avenergy (ex-oil union), Swissoil, Citec Switzerland (tanks), Ramoneur Suisse, Auto-suisse, l'Astag, ACS, the Swiss Union of Automotive Professionals (UPSA), Routesuisse. The Employers' Centre and GastroSwitzerland are also part of this committee, which can count on the support of the Swiss Union of Arts and Crafts (USAM), the UDC and some liberal-radical dissents. "The new law is inefficient in climate terms. It will at best reduce global CO2 emissions by half a million. The 4000 Swiss companies, including the Employers' Centre, which have concluded target agreements with the Energy Agency for the Economy have achieved impressive results in terms of climate and energy efficiency", counter-arguments the director of the Employers' Centre, Christophe Reymond. He sees in the commitment of Economysuisse "a will to repaint itself in green". The French-speaking climate strike movements are also fighting the new law, believing that it does not go far enough.