‘COV', ‘CO2', these taxes are returned to the population through health insurance premiums Each Swiss citizen receives 87 francs each year in return for environmental taxes. With the new CO2 law, this amount will be doubled. Instructions for use Bernard Wuthrich Take your health insurance policy. Below the amount of your gross monthly premium, you find a line (and a number) that is not always known what it is. It reads as follows: "Redistribution of the environmental tax (COV and CO2) to the population: in your favour, CHF 7.25." It is through the health insurance premiums that the incentives are refunded to the population. There are two. The first is the incentive tax on volatile organic components (VOCs), levied on paints, varnishes, detergents and solvents since 2000. It is reimbursed to the population in the form of a deduction of 13 francs per year per person for sickness benefits. The second is the CO2 tax levied on fossil fuels (mazout, natural gas) since 2008. Two thirds of its revenue is returned to the population – via LAMal premiums – and to businesses – through the payroll subject to AVS contributions. The discount is 70 francs per year per person. 80 francs per person A total of 87 francs per year, or 7.25 francs per month, is paid to the population. With the new CO2 law, this redistributive effect will increase. According to the Federal Office for the Environment (OFEV), it is expected to increase by about 80 francs per person per year and thus increase to 167 francs, always through health insurance premiums. According to OFEV, these additional 80 francs will come from two sources. The increase in the CO2 fuel tax from 25 to 30 cents will result in a redistributive effect of 20 francs per person per year. As for the surcharge on airline tickets, its revenues will be distributed in two pots: 51% will be distributed to the population, in a uniform manner and regardless of the number of flights carried out. According to OFEV, this should amount to about 60 francs per year per person. The remaining 49% will be contributed to the climate fund and will be used to finance measures such as the promotion of night trains or the development of synthetic kerosene.