The climate fund, subject of controversy CO2 LAW One billion francs a year: this is the amount that the climate fund should have. But revenues will be lower if incentives tax spread their behavioral effects. And the planned use of available money is multiple BERNARD WUTHRICH, BERNE @BdWuthrich About 1 billion francs a year. This is the amount estimated by the federal government for the climate fund provided for in the CO2 Act. Parliament will be created with four financial sources and will be used to support a multitude of various environmental projects. But be careful: the exact amount available will depend on the behaviour of the population and businesses, since most of these resources come from incentive taxes. But the more they persuade people to take a greener attitude, the less money they will have in the cash register. The amount of $1 billion in the Federal Council report is thus random. However, it can be decrypted in the following way. The main resource will be the CO2 tax. Already taken from fossil fuels (mazout, natural gas), its ceiling will be raised from 120 francs (currently 96 francs) to 210 francs per tonne of CO2. It is estimated that this green puncture is expected to be between 1.2 and 1.3 billion. Two thirds of these revenues, but a maximum of 450 million, are paid into the fund, while the remaining two thirds are paid back to the population and businesses. The use of aircraft slowed down by the pandemic The environmental pot will also be fed by 49% of the revenue from the tax on air tickets and from the tax to be levied on private aviation (500 to 3000 francs per flight). How much will that be? The federal administration estimates that between 500 and 600 million francs. But attention, relativises the referendum committee led by the oil and automotive industry: the pandemic will permanently slow the recovery of aviation, so that the revenue from the tax will be much less than what is envisaged, warned the director of the Employers' Centre, Christophe Reymond during the online debate organized by Le Temps. The administration also admits that the revenue from aviation taxes is "difficult to estimate because of the situation related to coronavirus". Two additional sources of funding will be added. The penalties imposed on car importers who do not meet the new CO2 emission standards will be paid half of the amount into the climate fund. This is about 5 million a year. Finally, the proceeds from the auction of emissions rights will also be allocated to environmental measures. It is estimated at $15 million. How will this supposed billion be invested? The climate fund consists of several channels that intertwine. The means from the taxation of fuel oil will be reserved for measures that concern the building, including the change of heating (heat pumps, solar pumps, wood, etc.). and thermal insulation. The Act specifies that 60 million is spent annually on the replacement of heating, energy planning of public authorities, the use of geothermal energy for heat generation, the installation of electric vehicle charging stations in buildings, the promotion of renewable gas and measures to cover the risks associated with the ecological clean-up of buildings. The fund also provides support measures for mountain areas, cities and municipalities exposed to the consequences of global warming, such as melting glaciers, landslides, floods and droughts. However, such measures cannot be financed by incentives. This is why they will be covered financially by the proceeds of sanctions and auctions. The last sub-pot concerns support for technological innovations. Direct aid will be financed from aviation tax revenue. This includes the development of green kerosene, environmentally friendly building materials, biodegradable packaging or entry into the market of electric trucks. An amount of 30 million will be earmarked for the promotion of rail transport, in particular night trains. A self-service shop according to Avenir Suisse The climate fund is however controversial. For Christophe Reymond, it is only a "grant gas plant, a climate pool, a black box". Avenir Suisse, which has just published a study on climate policy, calls it "self-service store". In addition to the clean-up programme for buildings, "we don't know exactly what the climate fund money is for," says the laboratory. He fears that the structure of the fund will make the butter of "commercial interest groups, supported by the left and green parties" and that, ultimately, "climate efficiency per franc invested will be low." According to Lukas R端hli, co-author of the study, "the money of the fund should be intelligently spared to finance negative emissions from 2050, or to repair climate damage in a few decades". Although it grants its "yes of reason" to the CO2 law, which is a compromise, the director of the Economysuisse, Monika R端hl, admits that, through its subsidy mechanism, the climate fund does not make it "completely happy". "Good for agriculture and winter tourism" These reserves leave the supporters of the marble law. "The fund and the programmes it includes are very important. They make more money available to the cantons and will make it possible to finance sensible measures such as heating change", the advisor to the Damian M端ller States (PLR/LU). "With the money from the fund, it will be economically interesting to invest in a new heating or electric vehicle, since it will finance charging stations," adds the president of the Green Party, J端rg Grossen. "The Climate Fund funds targeted measures to address the consequences of climate change in mountain and rural areas. It thus benefits agriculture and winter tourism," added National Councillor Christine Bulliard-Marbach (Centre/ FR), President of the Swiss Group for Mountain Regions (SAB). As designed, however, the climate fund remains a complex instrument. THE CLIMATE FUND, HOW DOES IT WORK?