In ten years, the leap forward of the electric car A few days before the vote on the CO2 law, an interview published by Le Temps resurfaced. In the latter, a professor at the EPFZ felt that the emergence of the electric car was unlikely. But ten years later, the data advanced in this article has changed well Etienne Meyer-... "The electric car is an aberration", this is the title of an interview published in 2011 by Le Temps, returned to the front of our site last weekend in the list of the most read articles. In this interview, Lino Guzzella, professor at the EPFZ, questioned about the future of the electric car, says, given in support, that it should not emerge in the next twenty years. With a limited range, battery loading time and cost, he felt that electric vehicles should remain the preserve of a small minority. But ten years later, as several readers have pointed out, this data is no longer up to date. This is not the first time that this text has been exhumed from the internet limbs, but two days before the vote on the CO2 law, it seemed important to us to come back to the question of the electric car and its role in reducing polluting emissions. Millions of sales at the European level In 2020 in Switzerland, 13,200 new electric powered cars were sold to which 26?400 hybrids were added, representing respectively 4.2% and 8% of the 312?900 new vehicles put into service during the year. "The market share of electric vehicles in sales of new cars is growing much faster than expected," says Anthony Patt, professor of climate policy at EPFZ. It is expected to reach 100% in most European countries by 2030." Taking into account the average duration of car traffic, all fleets could be electric by 2040. On the European market, sales of electric and hybrid cars have passed a million last year, with more than 500,000 purely electric cars sold. For Anthony Patt, this is an effect of the European standard requiring manufacturers not to exceed a threshold of 95 grams of CO2 emissions per kilometre for new vehicle ranges. "Without electric cars, manufacturers cannot achieve this goal," he stresses. More efficient batteries In the face of these measures, car brands have invested in the production of electric vehicles and models are increasing. Investments that have also enabled electric cars to fill some of their gaps over the past ten years. "The average range increased from 100 km in 2010 to 300 km in 2020," says Luca Maillard of the Transport and Environment Association (ATE). Technically, it could still be greatly increased but a range of 300 km is largely sufficient to cover the standard needs." Today, the most efficient vehicles can travel up to 600 km without charging. "This limit is no longer a loss of comfort," added Anthony Patt. It is rare to travel this kind of distance without taking a break." The battery charging speed has also improved considerably. The rapid charging stations allow for a load in about 20 minutes, but the latter require special installations due to the power delivered. "For daily loading, they are not necessary, shade Anthony Patt. In addition, they tend to degrade the battery faster." Overall, since the publication of the interview mentioned at the top of this article, the batteries have undergone three major changes. Their energy density has been multiplied by three, hence the increase in autonomy. Their service life in number of loads has also increased. "Currently, they are expected to cover 200?000 km, but this value depends on many factors related to use," says Luca Maillard. Most manufacturers offer an eight-year warranty." Some manufacturers are now announcing batteries capable of passing one million kilometres. Finally, they have become much cheaper. "Their cost has fallen by 90% in ten years," says Anthony Patt. It was necessary to count 1000 francs per kilowatt hour ten years ago but we are approaching 100 francs per kilowatt hour today."A more positive environmental assessment The environmental benefit of electric cars depends on certain parameters, particularly those related to their production. "The production of batteries requires a lot of energy, but this amount is constantly decreasing," says Patt. Some estimates suggest that if a battery is produced only using fossil-derived energies, it is necessary to travel about 100,000 kilometres with an electric car to start observing a reduction in emissions from a combustion car. But today, manufacturers take into account the energy supply of their plants in their development plans. The lack of an industrial recycling industry for these batteries is still a problem. "Technically, it is possible to achieve almost complete reuse of raw materials from battery components, including lithium," says Luca Maillard, "but today the low volume of used batteries and the high costs that result from them hinder the establishment of this industry. The introduction of regulations requiring the recycling of these batteries could unblock the situation. Overall, the environmental performance of electric vehicles is now better than that of conventional cars. "For combustion vehicles, account must also be taken of the effects of oil transport and the impact of oil spills," says Anthony Patt. This difference is true despite the trend of SUVs, which now dominates the automotive industry, including in electricity. "Among the new electric models put on the market, one in two models is a SUV," says Maillard. But an electric SUV keeps a better carbon balance than a combustion SUV, but the difference is less clear than with a small electric car."The reduction in emissions allowed by electric cars will depend essentially on the origin of the electricity that needs to supply them. "To achieve the goal of carbon neutrality in 2050, renewable energy production will have to be developed anyway," says Patt. The transition to the electric car must be made in parallel with this transition." However, one point has not changed in ten years. If the electric car is now an element of response, this change must be accompanied by a broader reflection on mobility and a reduction in the use of individual motor vehicles.