André Schneider: "Carbon neutrality in 2050 is a challenge for all aviation, everyone has to do their part" Fleet renewal, development of the alternative fuel market: as the CO2 law approaches, the Swiss aviation sector presents its solutions. André Schneider, managing director of Genève Aéroport, believes that the sector has the cards in hand to achieve this objective Etienne Meyer-... A few days before the vote on the revision of the CO2 law on 13 June, which provides for the introduction of a tax on airline tickets, the aviation sector presents its roadmap to achieve carbon neutrality. This document is the result of work involving airlines, airports, colleges and the Federal Civil Aviation Office (OFAC) and the Federal Office for the Environment (OFEV) at the initiative of the Aviation Research Center Switzerland (ARCS). For André Schneider, Managing Director of Genève Aéroport, and chairman of this working group, this study provides evidence that aviation has the solutions to achieve zero net emissions by 2050 in line with the objectives of the Federal Council's climate strategy. Time: Is this roadmap a response to the tax on airline tickets under the CO2 law? André Schneider: We wanted to respond to the discussions about aviation in general, not specifically the CO2 law. There has been a lot of debate about aviation, the purpose of which has been to say that the only option to decarbonize the sector is to reduce the number of flights. We wanted to show that we can maintain our offer by decarbonizing flights. We live in a globalised world, people will not stop overnight from flying to visit their families, for example in Portugal, by driving 24 hours. This study predicts an increase in the number of passengers in Cointrin in the coming decades. Is this compatible with emission reduction? There are three scenarios. In the highest case, we would reach 25 million passengers in 2040, but the most likely assumption we believe is to reach 21 million. This is a relatively small increase, knowing that we were already 18 million before the pandemic. For Geneva, the goal of net zero is achievable even with this increase. It should also be stressed that, with these passenger scenarios, it is not a goal to be achieved but a projection to be made so that we can set up planning for our infrastructure. In order to achieve zero net in aviation, are the efforts not more for companies than for airports? Companies have a lot to do because airports have taken a little lead in this area. Today, for example, the buildings at the Geneva airport built over the last five years produce more energy than they consume. We also transform the traffic on the tarmac by going to an electric motorization. But it must also be recognized that it is easier for us. However, in recent years, the companies have reduced emissions per passenger transported. It cannot be said that this is only the problem of airlines or airports. This is a challenge for the whole industry and everyone has to do their part. We are trying to help companies in this direction with an incentive program. Some of the taxes they pay to us are paid if they renew their fleet with last-generation aircraft, less kerosene-savoury and less noisy. According to this roadmap, much of the reduction in emissions is mainly based on the use of alternative fuels. It all depends on the temporality in which we set ourselves, since the targets run until 2050. Fleet renewal is also a key issue, as the new generation of aircraft reduces CO2 emissions and fuel consumption by up to 20%. But when you know that an airplane costs between 100 and 200 million francs, it won't happen immediately. In a first phase, from 2025 to 2040, biofuels and the optimization of flight management will play a major role. In the year 2040, it is the horizon from which planes could appear with new engines. But these technologies should still take decades to emerge. Manufacturers like Airbus are working on it, so these technologies will eventually emerge. We have a work ahead of us to do in this perspective. Let's imagine that there are electric planes that have 45 minutes between their arrival and departure. We're going to have to put in place infrastructure so that we can recharge them in this time frame. Similarly for alternative fuels, there is a whole preparation to be provided for their storage. In Geneva, we had a project in this direction that was not realized, but we have an idea of what this represents. If these technologies are available faster, we will re-evaluate the objectives. For the development of alternative fuels, the study recommends favouring international solutions. Can these capacities not be developed in Switzerland? The investment required for their industrial development is only possible on a large group scale. The point of this report is also to show that Switzerland can take matters in its own hands and that we must stop wanting to be a small Gallic village and do things in our own corner. For synthetic fuels, we have research groups that advance on different solutions, but probably not the resources to produce them. For example, for the production of kerosene via solar, huge fields of solar panels would be required. When I see the difficulty of installing it in Switzerland, it's not here that we're going to do it. One of the other solutions highlighted is to work on the optimization of flights. Can CO2 emissions still be reduced in this respect? Yes, it goes through more efficient flight routes or less greedy landing and take-off methods. For example, one can imagine no longer using reactors for displacement before take-off or after landing using alternative electric motors. In Geneva, this is not really possible because today it takes fifteen minutes of reactor heating to take off. At the airport, there is no parking space from which the aircraft must then drive fifteen minutes before taking off. But at airports like Frankfurt, aircraft sometimes move on the ground for a very long time. Will the necessary infrastructure not increase the right-of-way at the airport? Alternative fuels can be mixed with kerosene directly in tanks or pipelines upstream of arrival at the airport. It will certainly require specific infrastructure for electric or hydrogen aircraft, but at the moment we do not yet have an example of what this represents. We can talk about it when we get more visibility. But there is still space on the current site, where they could be installed. Apart from changes in technology, the rest is not insurmountable.