Can the President of EPFL commit to the CO2 law? In the German press, Martin Vetterli takes a stand in favour of the law put to the vote on 13 June. Could he have done so if his position had been different? Florian Fischbacher "Required to reduce CO2 emissions", "a huge opportunity for innovation in Switzerland". Published in the Blick, Martin Vetterli's plea for the CO2 law is clear. However, the commitment of EPFL's boss to the June 13 votes seems to run counter to the intentions of Federal Councillor Guy Parmelin, who would like to limit the public speaking of the scientific world – in the institutions dependent on Confederation – on political issues. At least on some subjects. In November 2019, the same Blick revealed that Guy Parmelin, notably head of Agriculture, reportedly attempted to "museum" the EPFZ Water Research Institute (Eawag), by intervening to prevent the publication of an alarming fact sheet on the effects of pesticide use in agriculture. The document highlighted a "great need to act" in a particularly sensitive area for the Minister responsible for the Economy, himself a former winemaker, since the population will also have to decide on the subject on 13 June. Two initiatives aimed at drastically restricting the use of pesticides are subject to the vote: "For clean drinking water and healthy food" and "For a synthetically free Switzerland". In the fact sheet reported in 2019, which remained confidential at the request of the Federal Councillor, however, scientists did not give any recommendations for voting. Follow our online debate this Monday, May 17 from 2 p.m. to 3 p.m.: Is a Swiss without pesticides possible? Not all subjects are equal According to the German daily newspaper, Guy Parmelin's speech, who later denied this version of the facts, was also motivated by his annoyance at the reading of a stand by a professor of chemistry at Eawag published by the Neue Zürcher Zeitung, in which the researcher criticized the Federal Council's strategy on the issue of pesticides. Meine Antwort zum heutigen Artikel im Blick: Ich schätze die unabhängige Forschung @EawagResearch sehr und habe die wissenschaftliche Freiheit nee in Frage gesturellt. Ich habe nie einen Maulkorb verhängt. Meine Aussagen wurden falsch interpretert. Mehr dazu sage in diesem Video: pic.twitter.com/kHRmelinYzEn — Guy Parmelin (@ParmelinG) November 11, 2019 The issue of faculty activism is not new and is a matter of concern to universities. In Lausanne, the Unil has been leading "a proactive approach" since April 2020, "a process to frame any speech of its faculty on militant and activist subjects," revealed the RTS last March. She cited, among other things, the very committed discourse on the climate of two personalities of the institution: the Nobel Prize in Chemistry Jacques Dubochet and the philosopher Dominique Bourg. About the two agricultural initiatives: The pesticide campaign sets the campaign on fire In the boots of a peasant "These two agricultural initiatives are punitive" Two initiatives to green agriculture In the case of Martin Vetterli's position – which is also prohibited by EPFL regulations – one must note, however, a notable difference: the opinion of the President of EPFL is consistent with that of the Federal Council, which defends the CO2 law. It is obviously less likely to attract Guy Parmelin than the positions taken in favour of the two initiatives on pesticides fought by the government, and given for the moment very slightly winning by the latest polls.