CO2 law: at the heart of sustainable finance YVES MIRABAUD PRESIDENT OF THE GENEVA FUNDING FINANCIAL PLACE Swiss citizens will be asked to speak on 13 June about the CO2 law adopted by parliament in September 2020 but attacked by referendum. For the Financial Place, this law is an essential link in the transition to a more resilient and sustainable economy. Geneva is at the centre of the mechanism put in place to achieve this goal. The canton at the end of the lake enjoys an exceptional position in sustainable finance thanks to the presence of financial institutions, asset managers, international organizations, NGOs, a leading academic sector and authorities engaged at both the Confederation, canton and city level. Geneva is the home of the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) providing seventeen keys to meet the challenges facing the world. The United Nations has also inspired the Sustainable Management Principles adopted by many local and international banking and financial institutions. A more sustainable asset allocation For the Financial Place, the priority is to reorient capital flows to meet the sustainable development goals set out in the Paris Climate Agreement or the UN 2030 Agenda. In this context, banking and financial actors have largely integrated the ESG criteria (environmental, social and governance) into all their activities, from investment to the capital market and credit. The involvement of financial intermediaries is, of course, necessary for the sustainable allocation of assets. However, it is not sufficient. Investors are called upon to become actively involved in this concerted approach. Indeed, banks, asset managers and independent managers act on behalf of their customers, in accordance with their instructions. The latter, whether they are natural persons or institutional investors (pension funds), must be able to make their investment decisions with full knowledge of the facts. They should be provided with adequate information on the ESG profile of the products offered. In the end, they're the ones who cut! The political world and the authorities also have a role to play in the direction of financial flows. In particular, it is up to them to set the legal and regulatory framework to accompany the transition. In keeping with the liberal tradition of Confederation, these rules must be inciting rather than coercive. For example, in order to strengthen the attractiveness of Geneva and Switzerland as a place for issuing and trading green bonds (the so-called "green bonds"), the advance tax and stamp duty cannot be maintained in the state. They are a resuscitatory obstacle to the development of the sustainable capital market in our country. Incentive landscape The CO2 law fits perfectly into this incentive landscape. This text is based on a combination of financial incentives, investments, innovations and new technologies. The law offers all companies the opportunity to reconcile economic efficiency and climate protection. From multinationals to SMEs, all companies ready to invest in climate-friendly measures can be freed from CO2 tax. The approach provides cumulative benefits as it reduces both emissions and business costs. The climate fund provided for in the law illustrates the shift in capital flows towards more sustainability. Indeed, the revenue from the CO2 tax on fossil fuels and airline tickets will contribute up to CHF 450 million per year to a climate fund. The latter will finance sustainable investments, such as district heating networks or electric car charging stations. It will also provide financial support for the renovation of the buildings. Finally, it will support Swiss companies so that they can market climate-friendly technologies more quickly. With regard to the activities of banks and insurance, the CO2 law requires Finma and the SNB to periodically measure the financial risks resulting from climate change. The Finma has already carried out such an exercise by publishing in 2019 its Climate Risk Monitoring Report, updated in 2020. These risks can be divided into two categories. The first concerns the physical risks that relate to the threat of rising losses and costs to the economy as a result of natural disasters and gradual changes in the climate. Such risks may result in substantial losses for insurance and reinsurance undertakings. The second is related to the transition risks resulting from environmental policy measures or disruptive technological breakthroughs. Building bridges between the two shores of Geneva The Fondation Genève Place Financière (FPGF) is committed to the CO2 law, which is the missing link in the Swiss scheme, in favour of a transition to a more sustainable economic model and capital allocation. For Geneva, the stakes are great: the canton is a leader in sustainable finance at the global level. Its unique ecosystem will be mobilized at the end of November 2021 for the second edition of Building Bridges Week. As its name suggests, this large-scale event aims to build bridges between the financial centre and the international community, with the particular aim of accelerating the financing of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. The acceptance by the Swiss people of the CO2 law on 13 June would be a strong signal from our canton and our country in favour of this just cause! This text focuses on a combination of financial incentives, investment, innovation and new technologies