The CO2 law, a step for the climate ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY On 13 June, the Swiss population will say whether or not it accepts the CO2 law and the measures it includes. It's just one step. To achieve the objectives set by the Confederation, it will take more BERNARD WUTHRICH, BERNE @BdWuthrich The campaign will be as inflamed as the chimney of a refinery. The revision of the CO2 law is in fact opposed to three sides: the one that resists change – mainly the oil and automotive industry –, the one that wants to accelerate it at all costs – the climate strikers – and the one that believes that a prudent and phased process is the only feasible way in a country that, like Switzerland, practices direct democracy in a living way. The aim of the CO2 law is to provide solutions for "the next decade," Simonetta Sommaruga said when she came to the campaign. "This provides planning security for businesses. But it is true that, in order to achieve the goal of climate neutrality by 2050, which is the objective of the Federal Council, further measures will be needed," she concedes. For these additional measures, the guild has a name: the glacier initiative. It requires Switzerland to reduce net greenhouse gas emissions to zero by 2050 and to promote the use of fossil fuels and fuels. The Federal Council presented a counter-project to this initiative. It was consulted in September. Like the initiative, it proposes to include in the Constitution the target of zero net emissions by 2050. A net emission means that Switzerland will not release more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere than can be neutralized or absorbed by natural carbon sinks (forests, soils, geological deposits) or technical sinks. No absolute ban Unlike the initiative, the Federal Council does not wish to prohibit the use of fossil energy resources. For two reasons. On the one hand, it considers that, for security reasons, the army, the police and the rescue services must be able to use fossil fuels in the event of an intervention. On the other hand, it considers it necessary to take account of the particular situation of the peripheral regions. They are generally less well served by public transport and have less access to facilities such as remote heating, notes the Federal Council's report in support of the counter-project. However, the CO2 law voted on in June may be more difficult to get accepted in these regions than in urban areas: the increase in fuel prices (10 to 12 cents per litre maximum) as compensation for their import and the incentive to replace oil heaters may have more consequences in mountain regions. 11 to 12 billion more In the pink-green camp, the CO2 law is considered to be only a first step if Switzerland wants to meet the commitments made under the Paris Agreement. The Greens presented their climate plan at the end of last year. The Green Party wants to reduce internal emissions and emissions from so-called "grey" imports by 50% by 2030 and a positive climate balance by 2040 instead of 2050. For the party, this "Green New Deal" is more necessary than ever after the crisis of the coronavirus. The Greens presented a green economic recovery plan a few days ago, which will help to reactivate the economy by harmonizing with climate protection requirements. "In any case, we must invest in climate protection and in the economic sectors that protect it. But we need to accelerate these investments," summarizes the party president, Balthasar Glättli. In his view, this green recovery plan is the preliminary to the climate plan adopted by the party. In both cases, additional measures to those provided for in the CO2 law would be necessary, he said. The cost of the green recovery plan is estimated at 11 billion francs. It is incorporated into the expenditure already voted by the Federal Council and Parliament to get out of the crisis. To finance this program, the Confederation may be in debt, but other resources may be requested, such as a solidarity contribution on dividends or additional payments from the reserves of the SNB, according to National Advisor Sophie Michaud Gigon. At this stage, the Greens do not intend to call for additional taxation of fossil fuels. The National Blockage of May 21 The PS also developed a climate scenario that he named "Marshall Climate Plan". It plans to invest heavily in renewable energy and in electrification of mobility. And we're counting on 12 billions of investment. The last camp, that of the climate strikers, that wants to "create the balance of power" in order to achieve climate neutrality by 2030 already remains. To this end, he intends to "lock the whole system by a general strike" on 21 May. A (im)mobilization that, three weeks from the election, could rob a part of the population.