"The carbon tax is the liberal instrument by essence" PHILIPE THALMANN To increase the cost of greenhouse gas-emitting activities in order to better account for their real cost to the environment: this is the principle of the carbon tax, one of Switzerland's main weapons against climate change. It could be strengthened if the revision of the CO2 law was accepted on 13 June. EPFL's environmental economics professor and member of the E4S laboratory delivers his analysis ABOUT BERNARD WUTHRICH AND PASCALINE MINET @@BdWuthrich @pascalineminet How can we reorient our economies to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions? This is the daunting task facing all nations involved in the fight against climate change. According to the most recent work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), in order to avoid the worst consequences of warming, it is essential to achieve carbon neutrality in 2050 – at that time, we will not have to emit more CO2 than we can absorb from it. The Federal Council is committed to meeting the challenge. To achieve this, different tools exist, one of which is favored by economists: it is the carbon tax. By increasing the cost of activities and products that emit large quantities of greenhouse gases, this tax must make alternatives more environmentally friendly and thus facilitate their deployment. Switzerland is a precursor in this area, since it is one of the few States to have adopted such a tax, even if it is only partial. The revised CO2 law, on which the Swiss will express themselves on 13 June, intends to reinforce this approach. What is the carbon tax? It is a tax on energy products proportional to the amount of greenhouse gases that will be emitted when they are burned. In Switzerland, a carbon tax was introduced in 2008 on fossil fuels, mainly heating oil and gas. It is an incentive tax to encourage building owners to replace their oil boiler with a remote heating connection, a heat pump or other renewable resource, or at least to clean up their building to reduce consumption. It is based on a basic economic principle: when something becomes more expensive, it is sought to buy less or to substitute it. For political reasons, it has been decided not to subject fuels to this tax, even if they also cause significant CO2 emissions. What are the benefits of such a tax? It's the least direct instrument ever. There is no ban, you can continue to consume as much fuel oil as you want, or find the best solution to use less fuel. Everyone is free to choose. This tax has proved its worth. Only in the construction sector, the only one to be submitted to it, have emission reductions been the largest, about a third since 1990. However, in the transport sector, which is not concerned, there was no decrease in emissions during the same period. What does the revised CO2 law provide for in relation to the carbon tax? The new law provides for a continuation of the tax and its gradual increase. Today we are at 96 francs per tonne of CO2, or 25 cents per litre of oil, with a ceiling of 120 francs. The new law provides for a gradual increase of up to 240 francs if necessary. The path of progress is set in relation to the reduction objectives to be achieved. If these objectives are met, the level of the tax will not change. If emissions do not decrease sufficiently, fuel oil will have to be increased to meet the targets. And there is still no question of extending it to fuels. But these will be affected differently. Where is Switzerland in relation to carbon taxation? The Swiss tax is one of the highest in the world. But few states have actually introduced a carbon tax. Germany or Austria, for example, think about it, but have not yet done so. It should be recalled, however, that this is only one of the instruments available to States to combat global warming. There is also the promotion of public transport, renewable energy, regulation, or the emission rights market, which concerns large emitters. Some 40 companies are already participating in this system in Switzerland. Since last year, our carbon market has been connected to the European market. Instead of introducing the carbon tax, it could also have been extended to all businesses and building owners, but it would have required calculating emission charges for each participant and assessing what each had actually issued. That is a lot of bureaucracy. The carbon tax is simpler to implement. There are still resistances in some economic circles. In general, taxes do not boost the economy, on the contrary... The carbon tax is the liberal instrument by essence. If it is not appreciated, it is still being paid on its residual emissions, even if it is not polluted. Like the garbage tax, which we pay on his last bags, even when we have sorted in an exemplary way. Instead of the tax, one could choose to subsidize companies that reduce their emissions, but in this case, where would the money come from? We do this in agriculture: we pay farmers to preserve the natural spaces, because we want to maintain their activity. But this does not make sense in the air transport or industry sector. For reasons of efficiency and social acceptability, however, the tax must be accompanied by compensatory measures. It can be a burden for certain categories of the population. Tax revenues can be used to help households or businesses in difficulty reduce their emissions. This is already being done in the transport sector, where the tax on heavy goods vehicles is being used to subsidise the road haulage. Who will be most affected by the carbon tax? The CO2 fuel tax has an impact on households living in oil-fired and poorly insulated homes or apartments. Tenants can't do anything in this situation. However, this effect should not be overestimated, as the owner of a building with high loads is obliged to adjust its rent if he wants to avoid people moving elsewhere. And then there's the Buildings Program, which helps the owners clean up their buildings. The new CO2 law could also lead to higher fuel prices, as importers will have to offset a greater proportion of their emissions and pass these costs on as price increases. But this one is framed. Currently, the limit is 5 cents. It will increase to no more than 10 cents and then to 12 cents from 2025. From an economic point of view, it makes no sense to set such a ceiling, because we do not know how much compensation projects will cost. But it has been fixed in such a way as to reassure the motorists. Is the climate fund not a paradoxical instrument, since it will be fed by carbon tax revenues, which will logically be reduced in the future? The climate fund will be financed by various sources: the CO2 tax, the airline ticket tax, and sanctions on sales of vehicles with too high emissions, in particular. It is true that the purpose of levying an incentive tax on polluting emissions should not be to finance a sustainable public expenditure, since the revenue is decreasing precisely when the incentive tax is applied. The climate fund does not have this problem: on the day that there will be no more CO2 emissions, the tax will no longer generate revenue, but there will also be no need for subsidies to reduce emissions. In the coming years, the tax rate will rise, but the CO2 emissions from which it is levied will decrease, so that the revenue could increase a little further before it will fall fatally. Is the reimbursement of part of the tax incentives to the population via health insurance a good solution? It's a bonus-malus system. If you are average, you will recover the amount of taxes you paid through your health insurance. If you pollute more, what you are reimbursed will be less important than what you have paid. This automatically rewards those who have reduced their climate impact, without the need to monitor what everyone is doing. How to fix the amount of the tax? If there was a global tax, it could be linked to the temperature reduction target set by all the countries that signed the Paris Agreement. But we are far from such a scenario. This is why a small country like Switzerland must assume its responsibility and set a target for reducing its greenhouse gas emissions. It then gives itself the means to achieve this objective, including a CO2 tax which is gradually increasing. Could a lower level of tax be achieved if it were adopted by a larger number of countries? In theory, yes. Unfortunately, it doesn't work. This is why Switzerland has set a target of zero net CO2 emissions by 2050. It has been defined independently of what the rest of the world does. Of course, it is hoped that everyone will act to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The first step should be to stop subsidizing coal in countries where it is still the case. Are there subsidies in Switzerland that are negative for the climate? The tax deductibility of travel expenses can be questioned, especially for journeys by car between home and work. The current system, which varies from canton to canton, is an incentive to use the car. In all French cantons except Geneva, motorists can deduct some 70 cents per kilometre without limitation. The deduction could be capped on the amount of the SBB general subscription, for example, as the Confederation does. Agriculture subsidies, which do not really take account of the climate impact of agricultural production, can also be mentioned. For example, the Confederation finances advertisements for Swiss meat when it is the food that produces the most greenhouse gases. But it's a delicate subject. The climate fund plans to subsidize the development of green kerosene: it is double-edged, because it is also a way to subsidize air transport. We often talk about zero net CO2 emissions. What does that mean? The principle is that CO2 can continue to be emitted – the Federal Council scenario puts the figure of 8 million tonnes in 2050 – but what is emitted is removed from the atmosphere in the same year and stored permanently without ever being re-emitted. We're talking negative emissions. There are several ways to do this. The air can be drawn and chemically separated from the CO2, which can be kept forever in the mineral state. Trees can also be grown, which transform CO2 into organic matter. Example of an incineration plant: 40% of the materials that are burned in such a facility are organic. They contain CO2 removed from the atmosphere, which can be chemically separated from smoke, compressed and buried in a geological reservoir. This process can also be applied to a cement plant. It is a technology that is already known, but it does not yet exist on an industrial scale. It is very expensive and it is not known at this time who will pay or where CO2 will be buried. But new technologies can develop quickly. And using this approach seems essential, as actual greenhouse gas emissions cannot be completely reduced to zero by 2050.