INTERVIEW "I wouldn't call it a blow" SPACE The president of the EPFZ, Joël Mesot, announces the transfer of Didier Queloz to Zurich. The Genevan astrophysicist will lead a new centre there on the origin of life. Purpose: "Strengthening the place of Swiss and European research", explains the boss of the high school PROPOSED RECUILLISED BY CÉLINE ZÜND, ZURICH @celinezund In September, the Nobel Prize-winning researcher in physics Didier Queloz will leave the Observatory of the University of Geneva to lead a new centre on the origin of life at EPFZ, while keeping a 50% position at Cambridge University. Joël Mesot, president of the high school, answers our questions. You will soon be welcoming Professor Didier Queloz, Nobel Prize in Astrophysics. What was the reason for this decision? Didier Queloz joined us in September to participate in the creation of a new research centre on one of the major issues that animates science, the origin of life and the exciting questions that are related to it: how did life develop on Earth? Is there life outside the solar system?... This transfer is a big blow for the EPFZ... I wouldn't call it a blow. It is a way of positioning us to strengthen the place of Swiss and European research. I met Didier Queloz at the WEF in Davos in 2020. He was developing a project similar to ours in Cambridge. We then decided to join forces with a project which I hope will become a centre of national and international cooperation. Is this not going to exacerbate the competition between institutions in Switzerland? I'd rather talk about competition between continents. We must think at European level, while similar initiatives are developing in Asia or the United States. What will be the consequences of this transfer on your relationship with the University of Geneva? We do not intend to go alone, but to develop initiatives to strengthen our collaborations around this project. We have already very fruitful collaborations with the University of Geneva, as we have for a long time through CERN, but also on a new project on scientific diplomacy and another on quantum technologies. For example, we collaborate with EPFL in the field of cybersecurity and the Swiss Data Science Center. How do you intend to intensify the links between EPFZ and French-speaking Switzerland? I have always said, it is very important to me to build a bridge with Roman Catholic institutions and in particular EPFL. Not because I'm Romand – I feel like a citizen of the world and I spent more time in German-speaking Switzerland than in French-speaking Switzerland – but because it's an asset for research and Switzerland in general. As fewer and fewer Romands come to study at EPFZ, we are currently considering creating scholarships to encourage exchanges with EPFL. Would you have invested in a centre on the origin of life if it were not to be run by a Nobel holder? Yes. This idea of a centre on the origin of life precedes my meeting with Didier Queloz. When I visited all the departments after I took office, I found that there was a great desire in four or five departments to conduct research in this direction. The idea of such a research centre on the origin of life was then born under the OpenETH initiative. With this initiative, we have been encouraging ideas for interdepartmental research and with other institutions for several years. What other initiatives have emerged from this reflection? The creation of two research posts on the impact of global warming on the Alps in the Grisons. Collaboration with the International Red Cross and EPFL, or on diplomatic science with the University of Geneva and the Gesda (Geneva Science and Diplomacy Anticipator). The future centre on the origin of life is part of this development. Should investment in other critical areas of research, such as digitization or cyber security, be abandoned? We are investing heavily in digitization and will continue to do so. We have created a new research centre on artificial intelligence with, initially, 30 professors. It currently has more than 80. These different areas are not in competition, they are complementary: we will use artificial intelligence to explore the origin of life. You came to the head of the EPFZ two years ago in a turbulent period, marked by mobbing cases. What have you put in place since then to prevent such cases from happening again? A whole catalog of measurements. For example, there is a comprehensive initiation program for new faculty, and a new recruitment guide helps faculty clarify mutual expectations, rights and obligations with future PhD students. And we have put in place a system to defuse conflicts at an early stage, whether between students or with the hierarchy. What measures are most likely to change the situation? We reviewed the selection process for our faculty to also examine the social skills of the candidates. In addition, our new PhD order provides that there are always two reference persons for a PhD student from the beginning. We also have a new external ombud and a new external advisory service. Finally, we will launch a campaign against discrimination and for respect in the autumn. She was delayed because of the covid. During this pandemic year, experts have become both key figures and targets, as for the UDC, which calls for the dissolution of the Covid Task Force. Do you feel that they are trying to muzzle scientists? If we decided to muzzle the Swiss experts, then the media would turn to foreign interlocutors and we wouldn't have won anything. But I don't feel like it's the will of the majority. We will still have to take stock of the work of the Task Force, but in my opinion it has been extremely positive, despite some clashes or misunderstandings. Martin Vetterli took a position in the "Blick" in favour of the CO2 law. Is it the role of a president of EFF to give voting instructions? In general, the higher the hierarchy, the more we refrain from expressing ourselves, because we have a duty of reserve. There are, however, situations in which we can intervene directly in the debate, in my opinion: if our institution is directly concerned, as was the case with the initiative against mass immigration. Or when faced with a priority theme. What is your position on the CO2 law? I support the position of the Federal Council and a clear majority of Parliament. It is important to take prompt and concrete action to achieve climate goals. The CO2 law is a good basis for action, which leaves enough freedom and opens up opportunities for the Swiss economy and its innovation chain. What would you say if researchers took a stand against the CO2 law to point out that it does not go far enough? Is it legitimate for a researcher to play a militant role? Researchers are citizens like others, the principle of freedom of expression also applies to them. However, who engages in political debate must also accept criticism. So you're not thinking about framing the positions of scientists as the University of Lausanne plans to do? I don't know the exact situation in Lausanne. At EPFZ, we are conducting an internal discussion on the need to better explain our work and what research is. But also on the opportunities and risks that a public engagement can entail for researchers and the institution. The pandemic has accelerated the need for such a discussion and has shown the need to intensify this dialogue between science and society. Another hot topic is Europe. What would result in a shift away from the bilateral path to research? For us the central question is still and still is participation in Horizon Europe research project. A break with Europe would make us lose in attractiveness as a university. But it is not just about us, but about the future of Switzerland and its economy in particular areas: medical, energy. The challenges in these areas will not be solved with Asia or the USA, but with our close neighbours, because the stakes are local. Joël Mesot, President of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich: "We do not intend to go alone, but to develop initiatives to strengthen our collaborations around this project." (DOMINIC BÜTTNER FOR TIME) "This idea of a centre on the origin of life precedes my encounter with Didier Queloz" IN DATES In 1995, Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz first discovered a planet outside our solar system: an exoplanet orbiting around a solar-type star, 51 Pegasi b. October 2019 Announcement of the Nobel Prize in Physics to the two Swiss researchers, and to the American-Canadian James Peebles. September 2021 Didier Queloz leaves the University of Geneva, where he works at 50%, to create a centre on the origin of life in Zurich. (LT) "We are living a historic moment for research on life in the Universe" RESEARCH Didier Queloz wants to make the future centre on life of the EPFZ an international "magnet" To explore the mystery of life: this is the announced objective of the "Centre for Origin and Prevalence of Life" which will be led by the Genevois Didier Queloz at EPFZ in September. "It's a long story and an extraordinary adventure," stresses the future director on the phone, who leaves the Observatory of the University of Geneva. What is life? Where and how was she born? Is it outside our planet? To answer these questions, the centre will bring together scientists from several disciplines: biology, astrophysics, chemistry, earth sciences and the environment. "We are living a historic moment, of the same order of importance as the discovery of the Moon with Apollo. The research on this great issue of the origin of life is in full swing, thanks to the advances of science in several disciplines," said Didier Queloz. Other life research hubs were established in Harvard, Cambridge and California. In Zurich, about 15 people are involved in the preparatory work, for a project destined to grow. At this stage, no funding is articulated. "This will be one of my roles: to define a budget," explains Didier Queloz, who wants to make this centre an international "magnet" for research. A strategic will Why in Zurich and not in Geneva? "At EPFZ, there is excellence, critical numbers of researchers, funding and a strategic will to do something new," explains the researcher. In October 2019, Didier Queloz was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics, together with his former professor Michel Mayor, for discovering, in 1995, the first planet around a star other than our Sun. In 2013, he was recruited by the prestigious English University of Cambridge to hold an astronomy chair devoted to exoplanets. If he leaves Geneva, where he still holds a 30% faculty position, it's also for "his survival," he says laughing: "I can't lead everything on the front. But I was born in Geneva, I have an emotional relationship with this city and my relations with the University of Geneva will not end, we will continue to work together. Geneva and Zurich, it's one big village." The researcher relativizes the loss for his home town: "At 55 years old, I'm already part of the past! The future is young researchers. I don't care about the University of Geneva, which attracts brilliant people, and the Department of Astronomy, which will remain the largest in the country." At the origin of this project, there is also the meeting between two Romands in Davos. When he spoke with Joël Mesot at the WEF, Didier Queloz spoke of his work in Cambridge for the Initiative for Planetary Science and Life in the Universe, which brought together researchers on the issues of life in the Universe. The president of the EPFZ then informed him of the interest in his institution to carry out a similar programme. C.Z.