"Electric mobility will become the new standard" VOTATIONS The TCS is the only organization in the automotive world to defend the CO2 law. Only a minority of members were so disappointed that they resigned. The club's president, Peter Goetschi, considers the ecological transition of mobility necessary and defends the free choice of means of transport BERNARD WUTHRICH, BERNE @BdWuthrich Despite the announced increase in the price of gasoline from 10 to 12 cents per litre to the maximum, the president of the TCS, Peter Goetschi, considers the new CO2 law "acceptable" and recommends to vote yes. The TCS has decided to support the CO2 law, unlike other organizations in the automotive industry. What fly is it stinging? We had intense discussions about this law and it was not a fly bite that would have influenced us (laughs). We examined the implications for our members. We found that it guaranteed them the free choice of means of transport, contained no prohibitions and contained a ceiling on compensation costs. We have come to the conclusion that this was an acceptable compromise, even if the law is by far not perfect. It does not restrict individual mobility: it is our main objective today as in ten, twenty, thirty or forty years. In this way, the TCS supports a law that provides for an increase in the price of gasoline and diesel from 10 to 12 cents per litre. How do you justify this position vis-à-vis your members? The current law already allows for the transfer, up to 5 cents per litre, of the compensation for the importation of fuels. In fact, only 1.5 cents are charged to consumers. The ceiling will actually rise to 10, then 12 cents as early as 2025. But it's a maximum rate. We did the math. Let's take an average consumption of 7.3 litres per 100 kilometres and 13,500 kilometres per year. This represents an additional expenditure of 99 francs if the maximum amount of 12 cents is applied. This is not annoyance, it is true, and it does not include the increase in the fuel tax or the increase in the tax on airline tickets. However, Switzerland has made a commitment to reduce its CO2 emissions and mobility, which generates 30 to 40%, must contribute to this. That is acceptable to us. What reactions have you received from your members? The TCS has 1.5 million members. To date, we have recorded approximately 70 terminations related to our position on the CO2 law. Of course, we regret them and seek personal contact with them. But, overall, it is a limited number and, despite the crisis of the Covid-19, our growth is higher than in previous years. The effects of the CO2 law will further affect the inhabitants of the peripheral regions. Does the CTF abandon them to their fate? Of course not. Of course, the supply of public transport is less extensive in these regions and it was particularly crucial for their inhabitants to cap the increase. They will also have the opportunity to gradually change vehicles. The requirements are becoming more stringent, the consumption per kilometre is declining, manufacturers are increasingly offering electric and hybrid vehicles at increasingly affordable prices, and this is happening across the range. Other technologies such as hydrogen are also promising. Thus, the necessary ecological transition becomes possible. But there is still an effort to have a high-performance charging infrastructure. The climate fund specifically provides for subsidies for the installation of charging stations in buildings. Yes, but it's just a shy first support. More resources will be needed. I am convinced that electric mobility will become the new standard. This will require large quantities of charging stations, both in the private and public sectors. The owner of his house has no difficulty installing his own. The tenant must convince his owner or his real estate authority. Does the TCS commit to this transition? Our Mobility Academy was a pioneer in electrical mobility ten years ago and we are continuing in this direction in a targeted manner. On one side, our patrollers must be able to solve a breakdown that occurs on an electric motor. On the other hand, there is a huge need for reliable and neutral information in this field which suffers from several unfounded myths. Finally, with electric mobility, we do not simply change fuel, we change mobility. We don't charge a battery like we're filling up at the gas station. Recharging stations are required at home, at work, or in both places. It's a big challenge. The TCS celebrates its 125th anniversary this year. Is support for the CO2 law a step in its evolution, a more "green" position than in the past? Initially, the TCS was created by cyclists seeking paved roads. Over the decades, the expectations of our members have changed: they have wanted efficient roads, a high level of road safety, troubleshooting services, etc. We have always adapted to these new needs. Today, they are no longer only travelling by car. They are attentive to all mobility offers. Our support for the CO2 law is not a "green turn", but the logical continuation of this constant adaptation to the demands of our members. In an effort to ensure sustainable funding and to share the public space, which is not extensible, the TCS also supported the creation of road and rail funds and the counter-project for the bicycle initiative. By defending too much the free choice of means of transport, does not the TCS itself put itself at risk? No. Mobility is becoming increasingly multimodal. The time for opposition of the different modes of transport has passed. We do not want to force our members to own a car to be part of the TCS, but to allow them to live their mobility by freely choosing their means of transport. Peter Goetschi, President of the TCS: "Switzerland has made a commitment to reduce its CO2 emissions, and mobility, which generates 30 to 40%, must contribute to this. This seems acceptable to us." (MARCO ZANONI/LUNAX FOR TIME) "Our support for the CO2 law is not a "green shift", but the logical follow-up of the constant adaptation to the demands of our members" PETER GOETSCHI, CHS PRESIDENT