Opinions CO2 law: a necessary response to proven facts OPINION. The world is in fever, wrote Jacques Dubochet, 2017 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, and Jean Martin, a former Cantonal Vaudian doctor. It is imperative to vote yes on June 13 to the CO2 law Jacques Dubochet and Jean Martin * The world is in fever. We are living an exponential race towards disaster, illustrated by the data collected under the title "The Great Acceleration", which show what has happened since the beginning of the 20th century (a beat of eyelids in world history) in terms of the reckless use of Earth's resources, in some 30 sectors. Since the middle of the last century, its temperature has been rising. This strange anomaly regularly doubles every thirty years in a way that seems inexorable. Since the beginning of the phenomenon, the Earth has already taken more than 1°C. Despite the increasing efforts, the acceleration of the climb has not yet weakened a fifrelin. Bad news, which means that, without much-enhanced measures, the phenomenon will continue. We will have 1.5°C around 2030 and the famous 2°, which the specialists say should not exceed, will be for before 2040. But why is the temperature rising? It is remarkable that the amount of CO2 from fossil origin that is sent into the atmosphere follows the same exponential law of doubling every thirty years. Is it by chance that these two laws are the same? Certainly not, this is the indication that CO2 production is the cause of fever. Everyone knows that, moreover, unless they prefer not to see, not to think. But this direct relationship between heating and CO2 production has another consequence – reassuring in principle – that it is enough to control the second to defeat the first. That is exactly what the CO2 law calls for. But don't hang out. This beautiful proportionality will not last long. For the time being, however, the curves mentioned above tell us that the system is probably still manageable. But we know that breaking points beyond which the system becomes chaotic are emerging. The CO2 law can't wait. Do not play the end of the month against the end of the world Debate on this law, it is not a matter of playing the scene of "The end of the world against the end of the month" which was much talked about following the French revolt of the "yellow vests" of 2018-2019. However, reasonable observers note that, very busy avoiding a catastrophic future for the planet, we may ignore the reluctance, among the less materially affluent, to pay more for the litre of gasoline. Objection admitted, the subject deserves attention. Even if an annual extra cost of around 100 francs per motorist seems to be bearable for most. On the political side, it is true that we must remember the epic of the 100-franc motorway vignette rather than 40 francs, refused by the people in 2013 with 60% of no. The vignette was Clochemerle in Helvetic mode, folkloric and without any effect on the march of the republic and society. On the other hand, if the CO2 law fails because a majority is persuaded by the songs of the sirens of oil and air – and their political relays – we will all, after saving a few cents on gasoline, have to assume the effects of our contribution to a let go to the dramatic consequences. Already, the disruption affects the health of people and populations around the world – and it can be pointed out that the number of diseases and deaths that will be caused by climate change will be a high multiple of the losses that the covid is currently causing. Unable to wait The necessary societal changes in industry, the economy, finance, agriculture, mobility require marked changes in our ways of living, working, producing, extracting. It would be easier to remove these worries as a bad dream and rejoice to be able to watch football games again... But close eyes and ears to the facts? Climate damage seems to occur "slowly", this impression is totally wrong. It is obviously not possible to wait and see (for example, think of the dramatic melting of ice at both poles). Saying "this has been so far, it will be going for a while again" (with the same economic model) is extraordinarily myopic, unconscious – André Hoffmann, of the pharma Roche, the so-called suicidal. As for the sentence "There is no question of re-regulating the old system, which is condemned by environmental and health challenges", it is not that of an activist from Extinction Rebellion, but of Klaus Schwab, the WEF boss. To continue in the same way is to disdain the (over)life and well-being of the coming generations. That will no longer be able to correct the situation because of the fact that the tipping points will have been exceeded. Practically If we want to consider the facts and the importance of achieving the objectives of the Paris Agreement of December 2015, where would we go after a refusal of the CO2 law? "Business as usual" on the trajectory of exploitation/resource extraction (including fossil fuels), no adequate restraints on energy expenditure by heating, transport, industry, etc. Instead, as in 2020, to exhaust the resources that the planet provides for us all year round by 8 May, this "Day of Exceedance" will soon be in March – it will take four planets rather than one to sustain a society like ours. Climate strikers imagine that the rejection of the law would force political power to move faster and more efficiently (or, better, force society to change its political system...). This dream... is a dream. Without this law, there will be no vigorous pro-climate measures in this country before 2025 or even 2030. Rising perspective... for the cultivation of citrus fruits on the Swiss Plateau. Finally, the SonntagsZeitung of 2 May points out that it is essentially the rich households that will bear additional costs linked to the CO2 law and that it is, in fact, a social law since the taxes collected will be redistributed to the people. The TCS is in favour of this – that is, it is! – as well as many organisations which are not marked by an "ecological term". It is imperative to vote yes on 13 June. * Jacques Dubochet, 2017 Nobel Prize in Chemistry and Jean Martin, former Cantonal Vaudian doctor