"We don't gain anything to make the CO2 law fail" CLIMATE For Environment Minister Simonetta Sommaruga, "the release of fossil fuels is inevitable." We should start without delay the necessary changes in mobility and heating. The taxes are being encouraged, she says PROPOSED BY BERNARD WUTHRICH, BERNE @BdWuthrich The new CO2 law is being fought by a double referendum, one launched by automobile and oil organizations and supported by the UDC, the other by a part of the climate strikers. Federal Councillor Simonetta Sommaruga responded to their criticisms. Is Switzerland more affected by global warming than other countries? Yes, in Switzerland, the Alpine country, temperatures rise twice as much as the world average. Glacier melts, agriculture suffers ever more frequent periods of drought. This generates significant costs, largely borne by the municipalities and the cantons. What does the CO2 law actually bring to mountain areas? The CO2 Act creates a fund that will help municipalities to carry out flood protections and landslides caused by the melting of glaciers or to stabilize lifts. This is also why the Groupement pour les régions de montagne and the Swiss Alpine Club support the bill. Opponents say that many countries are failing to meet Paris commitments and that Switzerland's efforts will only reduce global CO2 emissions by half a million. Is that worth it? Switzerland is not alone. The EU and even the US have launched ambitious programmes. The new law will speed up technological progress and ensure jobs at home, rather than leaving us on the spectators' bench watching other countries occupy innovative sectors. Climate strikers want the state of emergency to be proclaimed and climate neutrality to be achieved by 2030 already. How do you respond to their impatience? I met them. I understand their impatience and I appreciate that they are very well informed. But they won't gain anything by defeating the CO2 law, because we would lose years to tie up a new project. In case of no, the oil and automobile lobby would be the big winner. Halving our CO2 emissions in the next ten years is already an ambitious goal. The new law promotes investment in Switzerland. It's better than paying $8 billion a year abroad to buy oil. You're pointing the finger at oil and automobile organizations. But is it not legitimate for them to defend their economic model and their jobs? In our democratic system, a referendum is always legitimate. What we need to know is that the release of coal, oil and fossil fuels is inevitable. The path is set. All of Switzerland's economic partners are moving in this direction. A no to the law will not prevent this transformation. Maintenance of a petrol car is increasingly expensive. The garage operators will focus on other propulsion models, electric or hybrid. They will always have work, but it will not be exactly the same as today. Switzerland has the training and innovation potential to support this change. The oil and automobile lobby is not alone in fighting the law. GastroSwitzerland also supports the referendum. Are the concerns of this industry, which is already very affected by the pandemic, not legitimate? Today, only large companies can free themselves from the CO2 tax, with climate-friendly measures. With the new law, SMEs will be able to do so too. This will benefit the carpenter, the baker, the restaurant owner. J的observes that, unlike GastroSwitzerland, HotellerieSwitzerland supports the new law. Mountain regions suffer from global warming. But is the new law not going to penalise the inhabitants of these areas, who need the car more because they have less access to public transport? The inhabitants of these areas are more dependent on the car, that is true. However, the new law encourages importers to market cars that consume less fuel. People who need one will pay less, even if they don't opt for an electric model. In addition, a majority of households in peripheral regions are already heating without oil or natural gas. They do not pay the CO2 tax but still receive their share of the redistribution. It's positive for them. And they fly less often than city dwellers. In the end, they will benefit from the law and the return of the tax. Your services have calculated that the law would cost an additional 100 francs to a family of four who do not change their habits. Opponents put forward figures ten times higher. Honestly, won't the truth lie between these two ends? We have taken as a model a representative family: parents, two children, heating oil, petrol car, one flight in Europe per year. Opponents took extreme examples. Do you know many families who have a 250 square meter villa that consumes a lot of fuel and makes three or four flights away each year? I'm not. The principle of the law is simple. Those who behave environmentally friendly will save money through the tax redistribution mechanism. That is why the law is social and supportive of families. Do we not run the risk that the Swiss will fly to a foreign airport close to our borders, which will reduce the amounts to be redistributed? All neighbouring countries already levy a tax on airline tickets. It is certainly lower. But it is not redistributed to the population. It is part of public budgets. Our mechanism is very social: 51% of revenues are reimbursed to the population, including children, and the other half feed the climate fund. Is this climate fund not a gas plant that promises a lot of money to many people? It will be used to finance many projects: money will go to the population, for example to help it change heating. He will go to the municipalities to create remote heating and mountain areas to carry out flood protection works. Young people will have night trains. But I would like to recall the basic mechanism: taxes are incentives. They aim to convince the population to change their habits in order to reduce CO2 emissions. To replace the current fleet with electric vehicles, batteries will have to be purchased using ores, such as lithium, that must be extracted from the earth. Is it really ecological? The extraction of raw materials is a sensitive issue. I know her well, because I was formerly president of Swissaid and I was able to observe the consequences of the extraction of cobalt but also of oil. Switzerland is concerned about this issue. We still need to make progress, for example by strengthening the circular economy and promoting battery recycling. For this, we have, here in Switzerland, successful companies. The CO2 law is only one step. There'll be another one. You announced it. This will be the counter-project for glaciers. What measures will it include? Let us start with this decade, which is crucial. If nothing is done now, we will have to make such a catch-up effort after 2030 that it will cost significantly more to achieve climate neutrality in 2050. But I cannot say today what measures will have to be taken after 2030. This will depend on many factors, such as technological change, the degree of electrification of mobility and the replacement of heating. If no one heats up anymore, we'll have solved a lot of the problem. Meanwhile, the CO2 law does not prohibit anything, it is a liberal law that makes us take an important step forward for climate protection.