The CO2 law, a chance for our economy, a duty to future generations OPINION. Is the revision of the new CO2 law really expensive, ineffective and antisocial as some like to repeat it as prayer mills, asks Isabelle Chevalley, Doctor of Science, Green National Councillor Isabelle Chevalley, Doctor of Science, Green National Councillor, Liberal It is certainly interesting to discuss the costs of the CO2 law. But what about the cost of inaction? The OECD has calculated that the impact of climate change could rise to 10% of GDP. For Switzerland, the cost could reach 4% of GDP. While it is enough to invest 1% of GDP to limit the effects of climate change. Regarding the financial impact on our everyday lives, the Federal Council has made a realistic calculation. A family of four, driving 12,500 km a year with a car that consumes 6 litres/100 km. This family lives in a housing of 128 m2 and is heated by oil with an annual consumption of 8 l/m2. Finally, this family flies once a year to go somewhere in Europe. This family will pay in all, including the redistribution of the tax, about 100 francs per year. Climate protection is worth 2 coffees per month. An incentive effect The revision of the law requires that fuel sellers compensate up to 90% of CO2 emissions. To do this, they can add up to 12 cts/l. But for now, we're talking about five cents/l. In 2012, the average price of gasoline was 1.82 francs/l and in 2019 it was 1.60 francs/l, a difference of 22 cents/l. Everyone can see that this addition, even of 12 cts/l, is not significant given the variations in the price of gasoline over time. On the other hand, you just have a car tomorrow that consumes 7.4 l/100 km instead of 8 l/100 km and your bill will be the same. The idea, of course, is to encourage car owners to look at the consumption of their new car when they change it. This law would be ineffective because as long as large emitters like China do nothing, it will not change anything. It is too easy to say that "as long as the other does nothing, I do nothing". First of all, doing nothing is not an option because our economy would be too late and that would penalize our businesses. Next, let us not forget that one third of China's greenhouse gas emissions are emitted for the manufacture of export products. So we, Switzerland, are participating in China's CO2 emissions. So it's nice to say today that we don't need to do anything here in Switzerland. The aim is not to raise taxes It is tricky to see the oil lobby come to the rescue of the widow and the orphan by claiming that this law is antisocial. The purpose of this law is not to levy taxes, but to emit less CO2. Everyone can act to minimize the taxes that affect them. They are not families with no means that take the plane all the time or drive in big cars that consume a lot. Some low-income families may even benefit from this law. Finally, for those who think that man is not responsible for climate change, reducing oil consumption means avoiding billions of dollars going abroad. Some of these billions can be invested in Switzerland. What's the problem? It is still strange that it is a nationalist party that encourages us to consume fossil fuels that come entirely from abroad, even from countries that promote a very radical Islam. With what money do you think terrorists are financing themselves? It is interesting to read the draft ordinance of the Act, since it clearly states that at least 40% of the measures financed by the available funds must be implemented in rural and mountain areas. This twists the necks of those who want to cause a city/country divide. This CO2 law is an opportunity for our economy, it will enable us to boost innovation and keep our SMEs at the forefront of progress. A way to be patriotic It should also be recalled that Switzerland has signed the Paris Agreement. To date, we have reduced our greenhouse gas emissions by 14% between 1990 and 2019. We should be at -20% by 2020. It is very unlikely that we will succeed. So it's time to act responsibly and reasonably. What will we say to our children when they understand that we are burning gold to heat ourselves? They'll think we're crazy and they'll be right. Oil is far too precious to be burned like this. It must be used to feed petrochemicals that produce, among other things, medicines and other goods that we cannot manufacture without oil. Voting yes to the CO2 law is a way to be patriotic and boost OUR economy while helping to limit the impact of climate change. Several political and civil society figures will discuss this topic in a video conference entitled "What to think about the new CO2 law?", which will be broadcast on our website Tuesday, May 18th from 5pm to 6pm.