Through the CO2 law, the battle for the protection of the Alps is launched Partisans and opponents of the new CO2 law cross iron from a distance. For the former, the protection of the Alps, which is highly exposed to climate change, must dominate the debates. For the latter, it is the purse that prevails: the reform costs too much to the population and the economy Bernard Wuthrich The referendum campaign against the law on CO2. On Tuesday, supporters and opponents faced their arguments remotely about the costs and benefits of the proposed revision. For the opposition committee, composed of various economic associations in the oil, automotive, real estate and employer sectors, reform costs too much to the population and companies in the midst of a pandemic. "In the current situation, it would be irresponsible to impose even heavier burdens on the Swiss economy, which has been struggling with the coronavirus crisis and containment measures for the past year. The new CO2 law would make fuel, fuel oil and gas more expensive, which would have an impact on the entire value chain," warns GastroSwitzerland's president Casimir Platzer, who joined the referendum committee. The project plans to increase the CO2 tax ceiling on fossil fuels from 120 to 210 francs per tonne emitted and the compensation for the import of fuels from 5 to 10 and 12 cents per litre. To this is added a new tax on airline tickets which will oscillate between 30 and 120 francs per flight, depending on the distance travelled and the class of travel. Casimir Platzer estimates the additional costs to the economy at about 700 million francs. A portion of the revenue will be transferred to a climate fund. This will be used to subsidize the renovation of buildings, flood and fall-out projects and energy conversion programmes, among others. For Christophe Reymond, director of the Centre patronal, this fund "is nothing but a grant gas plant, a climate pool, a black box". The stakes for the Alpine regions The climate fund plans to allocate financial aid to mountain regions to combat natural risks such as rock falls, landslides and landslides caused by the melting of glaciers. That is why the Alpine Initiative Committee chose Tuesday to present the stakes in a village in the Bernese Alps: Guttannen. Skipped at 1000 meters above sea level, this locality near the Grimsel Pass is exposed to increased risks of torrential lavas and flooding than in the past. "Mountain regions will receive support from the climate fund to protect themselves from natural hazards," said National Advisor Jon Pult (PS/GR), president of the Alpine Initiative, who describes himself as a mountain mountain who "suffers from seeing glaciers melt and nature transform due to the climate crisis. I am therefore all the more angry when the opponents of the CO2 law treat us, the people of the mountains, as we are the rustres." The tone is set, the campaign is launched. It lasts until 13 June, the date of the election.