The carbon tax on airline tickets: a bad idea The carbon tax proposal is a bad idea that does not effectively meet the challenge of reducing carbon emissions, says Jean-Marc Thévenaz, Managing Director of EasyJet Switzerland Jean-Marc Thévenaz, Managing Director of easyJet Switzerland EasyJet, is aligned with Switzerland's goal of achieving zero net emissions by 2050. In this context, the revision of the CO2 law is an important step. However, the carbon tax proposal is a misconception that does not effectively address the challenge of reducing greenhouse gas emissions. As air transport is an international activity, solutions need to be put in place globally to have a real impact. It is also important to note that one third of carbon emissions come from short-haul flights (less than 1500 km), while two thirds come from medium- and long-haul flights (more than 1500 km). Tax reduces investment in technology transition We believe that airlines should be encouraged to renew their fleet with cleaner aircraft and to fly more efficiently, and that new technologies should be supported. The carbon tax on banknotes as proposed today would be counterproductive and would not encourage more sustainable aviation. By depriving the sector of the funds raised, the tax would also reduce the ability of industry to invest in its technological transition. It must also be borne in mind that passengers wishing to travel will continue to do so, and will be able to use other airports such as Basel or other European airports, where the Swiss CO2 tax will not apply. Finally, the Swiss tourism industry, already severely affected by the pandemic, will have to face the blow with this additional constraint. The tax is a social discrimination Twenty-five years ago, we reinvented the trip and made the plane affordable for millions of people. We allow customers to go abroad, spend time with family and friends, discover other cultures, and important social and cultural activities. As a contributor to the democratisation of travel in Europe, we consider this tax to be a social discrimination, because it would be a heavy burden for young people and families with limited budgets. However, we must reduce the impact of our industry on the planet. Despite the consequences of the pandemic, sustainable development remains a fundamental part of our business and is of great importance to our clients. That's why we're offsetting carbon emissions from fuel used on all our flights. We are the first airline in the world and the only one in Switzerland to do so. We are continuously investing in carbon compensation projects around the world, including reforestation, combating deforestation and supporting the development of renewable energy. Carbon offset is now the best provisional solution available, but it is not an end in itself. We remain focused on flight efficiency while new technologies are being developed. As we continue to invest in the renewal of our aircraft, we will welcome for the very first time five Airbus A320neo in our Swiss-based fleet in the autumn of 2021. This new generation of aircraft represents a radical change in efficiency, with a 20% reduction in fuel and carbon emissions and a 50% reduction in noise over take-off and landing phases, for the benefit of riparian communities. Zero-emission aircraft projects The future of aviation needs to be prepared today and we are pleased to see that the development of new technologies is growing. We have established two partnerships on zero-emission aircraft projects: one with Airbus, which plans to fly a hydrogen aircraft around 2030 and the other with Wright Electric, which plans to enter service in 2030/2032 of a fully electric aircraft. These new technologies offer short-haul flights concrete options of zero net emissions. As such, sustainable aviation fuels (SAF) are not the only solution for short-haul, unlike long-haul fuels. While Switzerland is considering the creation of new jobs through the development of sustainable solutions, it is important to stress that zero-emission technologies are also an opportunity for employment and the local economy. The industrial transition must be accompanied by the creation of a supply chain for hydrogen, electric batteries or the financing of an advanced form of carbon capture in the air. There is no single solution to the environmental challenge. Several initiatives and investments need to be carried out in the short and long term: carbon compensation, continuous effort to fly effectively, fleet renewal and support for new technologies. We are convinced that our "flying better" approach will allow us to continue to travel while protecting the environment, but also the connectivity and economy associated with aviation. Several political and civil society figures will discuss this topic in a video conference entitled "What to think about the new CO2 law?", which will be broadcast on our website Tuesday, May 18th from 5pm to 6pm.