The Centre is plebiscite of the CO2 law At a virtual delegates' meeting, the Centre has largely supported the CO2 law. Its president Gerhard Pfister took the opportunity to recall the need for a strong political centre. ATS The delegates of the Centre - the merger of the PDC and the PBD - agreed on Saturday their slogans for the elections on 13 June. By 178 votes to 23, they largely supported the CO2 law. This is a good example of the Centre's policy, they believe: it is an effective and balanced solution that advances the decarbonisation of the economy and society. On the other hand, they rejected the two agricultural initiatives on pesticides and on drinking water. The Centre wants to be the political force "that maintains the cohesion of Switzerland", declared Saturday its president Gerhard Pfister at the opening of the Assembly of Delegates. At the opening of this virtual meeting, he stressed the need for a strong centre and a consensual policy that weighs polarisation: "We are at the centre of the political spectrum. We are in favour of social balance," he insisted. Of course, parties that cry louder than others can seduce young voters, said the president of the Centre. But young people also have a growing need for consensus, as one political scientist recently said. Recently, the Youth of the Centre Party announced that they had won 500 new members. Required improvements on the framework agreement "And I also receive feedback from cantonal parties that the number of members is increasing. All this gives us very positive signals about the move of our party," continued Gerhard Pfister, reinforced in his analysis by the successes achieved in Basel-Ville, Neuchâtel and Solothurn" in cantonal elections. Following the summit meeting between Guy Parmelin and Ursula von der Leyen, the President recalled that the Centre, as before the PDC, had always made it clear in which areas it required improvements under the framework agreement with the EU: wage protection, the directive on European citizenship and state aid. In these areas, the Centre advocates for a cessation of a dynamic resumption of law. By excluding these three points from the scope of the agreement, the issue of sovereignty would be mitigated in a targeted manner on these politically sensitive issues. Otherwise, the influence of the EU Court of Justice could be feared. According to Gerhard Pfister, it should be excluded that Switzerland could, for example, be forced to ratify the EU's European Citizenship Directive and to make decisions that degrade the level of wage protection.