What re-adhesive? OPINION. In order to achieve a rapid, sustainable and equitable change in behaviour, the political authority must introduce constraints acceptable to the population, writes Philippe Dugerdil, member of CARPE (carpe.ch) Philippe Dugerdil, member of CARPE (carpe.ch) In the hope of an exit from the pandemic and the revival of the economy, we must ask ourselves the question of the form to be given to him knowing that an even greater danger awaits us: climate change. The Federal Council committed itself by 2030 to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 50% from 1990 levels. The Canton of Geneva issued a 60% reduction in December 2019. These objectives cannot be achieved without regulating the recovery of economic activity towards a reduction in emissions. Some conservative voices look at this perspective with horror and suggest that the market should be allowed. The first parameter they omit is the time scale: it is necessary to reduce by 60% in ten years. It will take centuries to rely only on the laws of the market cannot guarantee this objective for three reasons. The first is that individual decision-making (the "motor" of the market) depends on the perception of the danger that is subject to cognitive biases. "As long as I don't see anything, I don't believe it" (Conservatory Covera principle and Nobel Prize in Economics D. Kahneman). The second is that change is subject to the "tragedy of the common good" of environmentalist G. Hardin. In this context, it can be described as follows: why would I make an effort to improve the planet if my neighbour did not? The third is linked to the inertia of the phenomenon: when the individual is too hot and finally decides to act, it will be too late because we cannot lower the temperature. It will take centuries. So the return of a "market sanction" to restore balance will not work. It has been understood that to achieve rapid, sustainable and equitable change in behaviour, political authority must introduce constraints acceptable to the population. The CO2 law is one of them and it would be irresponsible not to accept it even if it is considered imperfect, because time is running out. Even carbon-based companies admit that we need to act for the climate... but otherwise they say. Another declination of the tragedy of the common good: to make others pay for the damage to the environment. But beyond this law, we will have to think about the post-carbon economy. How can we organise to develop economic activities, jobs, services, "clean" leisure? Let us take the emblematic example of air transport. In a Time article published on May 3, Pascaline Minet states that "aircraft actually corresponds to 27% of Switzerland's climate impact". In order to meet the canton's objectives, a recent study by NGO Noé21 estimated that the number of passengers at Geneva airport should increase from 18 million to 3 million per year by 2030. We can't be clearer. It is this type of measure that will have to be applied if the authorities have the courage to fulfil their commitments. The development time of a "clean" aeroplane is indeed incompatible with the time limits referred to. Because tomorrow is in nine years' time What's true for the airport is also true for the whole of the economy based on burning fossil fuels. It is therefore urgent for the authorities to rethink the overall economic model in order to avoid leaving too many people on the tile. A reflection and a competition of ideas with economic, academic and population actors would probably lead to the identification of avenues for a local economy that would provide jobs for the future. It is also necessary to organise and then start the corresponding projects. It is now that we need to think, not 2030. In short, if, as stated in the "governance is to be expected", our authorities urgently need to think about the post-carbon economy and the "CO2-compatible" trades. Because tomorrow's nine years away.