Subjective From Freedom MY WEEK SWITZERLAND "Switzerland does not bind, it defends its interests by adapting to the strongest," wrote in these columns columnist Joëlle Kuntz (LT of 05.05.2021). This is why Switzerland will one day adapt to EU rules, not without a few years of trials. It's a short-term pressure. It is, however, a much more serious, albeit more diffuse and distant, threat that skews national cohesion and institutional stability. It is the loss of confidence in the state and in the authorities, fuelled by deep antagonisms within the population on the conception of freedom. Discords that even cross the Federal Council where the socialists oppose the anti-terrorism and UDC law to the CO2 law and the Covid-19 law. The mistrust, even suspicion, which is expressed vehemently today comes from the opponents of the Covid-19 law, "Friends of the Constitution" and other followers of the theory of health dictatorship. They are hundreds, if not thousands, of demonstrating their hostility in Switzerland every week in the name of freedom. In reality, the five objects submitted on 13 June to the popular vote, the two phytosanitary initiatives, the Covid-19 Act, the CO2 Act and the Anti-Terrorism Act, reveal two irreconcilable visions of individual rights and collective constraints necessary to preserve our environment and to protect physical or health security, and even to control the subjection to algorithms. The people are increasingly called upon to decide on the same debate: prohibition of face concealment, electronic identification, responsible companies, etc. Two centuries after Benjamin Constant, we are replaying the debate he had theorized in 1819, "of the freedom of the Ancients compared to that of the Moderns". The opposition between a conception of freedom "which consisted of active and constant participation in collective power", at the risk of "subjugation of the individual to the authority of the whole", and a freedom consisting of allowing everyone to live, think, speak, come and come, to undertake or trade as autonomous citizens. A rudimentary description, of course, that does not take into account the complexity and interference of modern society and environmental issues. Does freedom mean only the absence of constraints on individuals or the possibility of continuing to decide jointly on restrictions to escape collectively from the tyranny of terrorism or the grip of pandemics and the deterioration of living conditions? This debate between freedom and security, Britain had had it since 2005 during the wave of terrorism that had struck London. At the time, Prime Minister Tony Blair admitted that real threats would increasingly affect our liberal perception of individual rights. "But because our conception of freedom does not evolve at the same pace as the real world, these freedoms are threatened," he prophesied. The latest polls before the 13 June election show, in any case, that the longer the threat seems to be, the less people are willing to sacrifice their right to immediate enjoyment. It is these contradictions that a heterogeneous government, far from a Tony Blair, is supposed to arbitrate. And that requires a long-term vision that an arithmetical government is unable to achieve. JOURNALIST YVES The longer the threat seems to be, the less people are willing to sacrifice their right to immediate enjoyment.