The myth of a benevolent regulator for the consumer EMMANUAL GARESSUS @garessus Good intentions are not enough. Regulations are intended to address a market gap or an imbalance in information between producers and consumers. The aim is to protect the individual from the risks of financial products, medicines, plant protection products or, like the CO2 law, from the effects of global warming. But are they achieving their goals? The state has long been regarded as a benevolent actor acting, in its role as regulator, for the well-being of individuals. This interpretation was undermined, exactly fifty years ago, by an article by economist George Stigler. The latter, the Nobel Prize winner in 1982, defended the idea that regulation was captured by industrialists and did not benefit consumers. Contrary to the ideas received, he claimed that the production of standards would be merely a service of political redistribution for the benefit of enterprises. Policy makers and public servants would give priority to entrepreneurs' requests to improve their chances of re-election. Companies use regulatory density to curb the entry of competitors. Standards are often unpopular. Individual homeowners, for example, are inexhaustible about the unnecessary details of renovation requirements, all more questionable and costly than each other. Even the most popular regulations are sometimes harmful to those who yet demand them from the authorities. Consider, for example, the introduction of a ceiling on rents. The city of Berlin decided to freeze the rents for five years in 2019. However, the decision was largely supported by tenants and left-wing parties. After two years of implementation, the Karlsruhe Court ruled the Berlin law unconstitutional. The economic verdict is at least as interesting. Since the rent freeze, the number of new rental properties has decreased by 50% in the German capital, according to the Ifo Economic Institute. Price control changes the incentives of economic actors and hinders construction. Avoiding generalizations The idea of regulatory capture remains very current, according to a dossier written by the University of Chicago on its blog "Promarket": "Facebook asks to be regulated more, private prisons advocate for longer incarcerations and Hewlett-Packard requires stricter environmental controls," says economists Luigi Zingales and Filippo Lancieri. But the too general character of Stigler's demonstration reduces the strength of his thinking. The industry does not play a leading role in the birth of a new rule, says Harvard professor Cass Sunstein on the "Promarket" blog. Economic interest groups, however, have a decisive role to play in rule-making. They weigh all the more heavily on the texts if they are well organized, few and better informed than the consumers, as the economist Mancur Olson revealed in his book The Logic of Collective Action (1965). The theory of Stigler's regulatory capture by the economy is therefore excessive and too general. Stigler's work, however, can be used as a guide. No one can ignore that powerful actors, both in technology and energy, often accompany the regulatory process to bring it closer to their desires. The reality is therefore more complex than Stigler imagined. The consumer knows this very well inside: there are good and bad rules. This is why its first need is not to be protected by the State but to collect all the necessary information about a product or service. Transparency standards can help. In addition, in Switzerland, it has an additional duty. Through direct democracy, it has the opportunity to influence legislative choices.