OPINION CO2 law: the cost of inaction ROGER NORDMANN NATIONAL CONSULTANT, PRESIDENT OF THE PS GROUP OF THE FEDERAL ASSEMBLY Just before launching its fight against the CO2 law, the oil lobby took care to put on its camouflage outfit. The former Swiss Petroleum Union has changed its name and is now known as Avenergy, a name that suggests that it is taking care of our energy future. We could smile at it as crude as the string is, but if the fireworks succeed, it will cost us billions. By proposing to reject the CO2 law, the oil lobby obviously seeks to extend its situational pension as much as possible. Let us recall that this is a substantial one, since in recent years we have spent an average of CHF 8 billion a year in Switzerland on the import of fossil products, not to mention taxes. Of course, the primary objective of the CO2 law is to protect the climate, i.e. to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions. It is a matter of fulfilling our commitments under the Paris Agreement. However, by stimulating investments in energy efficiency, as well as in renewable electricity and heat generation, climate protection policy generates very interesting indirect economic benefits. The first is obviously the gradual reduction in oil spending. If the CO2 law is accepted, the fossil import bill could rise from about 8 billion to about 5 billion by 2030, and eventually gradually move towards zero. The second advantage is the gradual shift in spending from the purchase of fossil energy to investment. It helps to maintain an increased share of value added in Switzerland, instead of financing oil-exporting states. In general terms, it is a matter of improving the energy efficiency of all our equipment, buildings and infrastructure, and of equipping ourselves to generate more renewable energy. It will be recalled here that these resources have the advantage of not requiring the purchase of primary energy, since water, wind and sun arrive free of charge in Switzerland. The third economic advantage is to limit the costs of global warming. If the international community fulfils its commitments, the increase in temperatures may be limited if it is not stopped. In terms of prosperity, each degree avoided counts. In contrast, any acceleration of warming will throw hundreds of millions of people on the roads of exile due to rising sea levels or the transformation of their region into burning and uninhabitable land. If the living conditions of billions of human beings gradually deteriorate, even the richest countries will suffer the economic blow. While the quantification of the fourth advantage is almost impossible, the latter is far from negligible: the reduction in overall oil consumption will also reduce the temptation to use military force to capture this resource. It will be recalled here that most armed conflicts have a direct or indirect connection to energy. In the face of such an essential issue as the energy future, the political parties that support the CO2 law, namely the PS, the PDC, the Greens, the PLR and the Liberal Greens, have agreed on a moderate formulation, capable of gaining a solid majority. The costs of failure would be so high that all chose to build a solid compromise. In this sense, the text submitted to the Swiss people represents only one step on the path that will free us from fossil fuels. But this is a necessary and decisive step, which must be taken without delay in order to have a chance to win the battle against global warming.