CO2 emissions fraud splatters in Africa Two officials of a vehicle import company paid a collaborator of the Federal Roads Office to escape the sanctions on CO2 emissions. The Confederation has lost 9 million in this case Bernard Wuthrich The corruption case revealed on Monday by the Public Prosecutor's Office of the Confederation (MPC) splashes a Federal Road Office (Ofrou) which is not at its first scandal. It falls in the middle of the campaign on the CO2 law, one of the components of which is the maximum CO2 emission limit imposed on vehicles, above which importers must pay fines. These sanctions are at the very heart of this case. Between June 2014 and September 2017, when the rose pot was discovered, a staff member of the OFRU, who has since left the office, reportedly "manipulated in the Federal Office's computer systems the data determining the CO2 sanctions investigation" in favour of a car import company. Worse still, he was reportedly paid by the company's officials for this service, up to 2,000 francs per month, according to the MPC's statement. Nine million unpaid to Confederation Thanks to this subterfuge, the company in question would not have had to pay fines between 2015 and 2017 for the vehicles it imported that exceeded the standard of 130 grams of CO2 per kilometre, in force at the time. The target value was lowered to 95 grams per kilometre in 2020. If the revision of the CO2 law is accepted by popular vote on 13 June, it will be further reduced by 15% from 2025 and by 37.5% from 2030. These manipulations deprived the Confederation of 9 million francs of revenue. The new CO2 law envisages allocating half of the proceeds of these environmental sanctions to the future climate fund. The MPC shall refer the former employee of Ofrou and the two members of the board of directors of the importing company to the Federal Criminal Court. The former official is accused of forgery in securities committed in the performance of public functions, passive bribery, fraud in contributions and benefits and fraudulent obtaining of a false finding. Already a case of corruption in Viège Both officials of the company are warned of incitement to forge documents in the performance of public functions, corruption, fraud by trade in contributions and benefits and fraudulent obtaining of a false finding. According to our information, the company in question is not an official importer, but a family-owned business that buys used vehicles directly. A hypothesis confirmed by François Launaz, President of the Swiss border, "An official importer cannot afford to do this," he comments. Embarrassing for Ofrou, this case is not the first one that splashes. In 2016, two employees of its branch office in Viège and the former director of a construction company were prosecuted for corruption in connection with the work of bypassing the city of Upper Valais. In 2013, the former boss of OFROU had been in contact with the Federal Financial Control (CDF), who had accused him of failing to comply with the Federal Finance Act in respect of two large-scale IT projects.