Total spending around the CO2 law: the stakes of this Sunday's vote This Sunday will be rich in votes. At the federal level, five objects will be submitted to the people, including the anti-pesticidal initiatives and the CO2 law. In several municipalities and cantons of the French-speaking world, there will also be important elections. Are there still any possible twists? Vincent Bourquin This Sunday's great suspense revolves around the CO2 law. Initially, this object seemed to have broad political and popular support. At the party level, only the UDC opposed it. Since the last survey of gfs.bern conducted on behalf of the SSR – published on June 2 –, supporters of this text have become increasingly concerned. Of course, 54% of the respondents still expressed support for this law, but it is six points less than in the previous probe, dated 7 May. The argument, which continues to convince, is that of the additional costs for the citizen in case of yes. The pandemic and the resulting economic difficulties also play a key role in this end of the campaign. The Greens have also tried to mobilize in recent days to reverse the negative trend and to recall the urgency of climate change. If this law is rejected, political settlement will begin very quickly. There are already criticisms about the PLR and the Centre, which would not have been sufficiently committed. Environmentalists also blame the Federal Councillor Simonetta Sommaruga for her too timid commitment. It would have been much more discreet than the president of the Confederation, Guy Parmelin, who has visited farms or businesses on numerous occasions to categorically oppose the two phytosanitary initiatives. Anti-pesticidal initiatives, little chance These two initiatives are losing momentum. In the last SSR survey, the initiative to ban synthetic pesticides was only 47% yes, while the initiative "For clean drinking water" had more than 44% support. Again, scores have changed sharply: a few months ago, both texts were in favour of the score. One of the main arguments that push the balance in favour of no is the fear of economic consequences for agriculture. The rejection of these two texts is almost a thing of the past, since for an initiative the double majority is necessary. From now on, the insiders are re-examining their ambitions and simply hoping to get the majority of the people, as for the initiative on responsible companies. These two objects have crystallized minds and caused unacceptable overflows: tanks burned or advising threatened states. After the fight, it will be time for reconciliation. It'll be a long time. Between the city and the countryside, but also within the peasant world. Anti-terrorism law: little debate Karin Keller-Sutter should find the smile of victory on Sunday. During the last federal elections on 7 March, the Saint-Galloise had lost a vote, for the first time since she was a federal councillor. It was the anti-burqa initiative. This time, the head of the Department of Justice and Police defends the Federal Act on Police Measures and the Fight against Terrorism (MPT). The referendum had been launched by party youths who considered the text to be liberticide and contrary to the rule of law. Its defenders, the Federal Council and the right-wing parties, replied that the law would better prevent possible terrorist acts on Swiss territory. The campaign has been rather discreet, but there have been several very critical positions taken by lawyers or international organizations considering this law in contradiction with international treaties signed by Switzerland. This is rejected by Federal Councillor Karin Keller-Sutter. On Thursday, again, the World Organisation against Torture (OMCT) even stated that: "These new counter-terrorism measures could open the door to information obtained by torture." If the latest SSR poll says that 62% of Swiss voters would vote for this object, this result could fall as a result of the raids carried out on young climate strikers and which re-launched, somewhat, the campaign around the definition of the term "terrorism" considered too vague by opponents of the MPT. Act covid, a campaign on networks At the federal level, the fifth objective of the program is the Covid-19 Act. Among other things, its opponents denounce the state's influence in the management of the pandemic. Although the ranks of the opponents of this text have increased in recent weeks, the last poll speaks of a yes to 64%. Opponents of this text are gathered mainly within the Friends of the Constitution and are strongly mobilized on social networks. Facing them, all political parties and the Federal Council. The Friends of the Constitution do not dispute aid, but the "highly liberbid and disproportionate" measures taken by the Federal Council to control the pandemic. They are trying to turn this election into a vote of no confidence on the strategy of the Federal Council. The advocates claim that if this law were refused, all financial aid would fall on 25 September. Fribourg: What future for Bluefactory? On the cantonal level, the Freiburgers will have to decide whether they agree to pay an additional 25 million for the Bluefactory Technology Pole project. The future of the innovation district is at stake. The government and parliament have largely supported this project, but a large majority of UDC MPs have operated on an instrument that is usually used little: the parliamentary financial referendum. Despite the support of the entire institutional Fribourg, the yes is not guaranteed in the ballot box. Among the general public, Bluefactory has so far been rather the image of an industrial wasteland that makes it talk about especially for its delays (the cantonal allocation plan was issued only in July 2018) and its disappointed expectations, such as that of creating 2500 jobs (now 340). In the city of Freiburg, there is also a vote that is taking place: it is totally against the current trend of favouring public transport. An initiative launched by the Parti des artistes and entitled "l'automobiliste n'est pas un pigeon, c'est un voyageur", requires that parking in Fribourg do not cost more than one franc per hour. The authorities oppose it, in particular as the city would lose between 1 and 2 million francs each year. Will the Canton of Geneva accept a development project? The Genevans will vote again on a land use plan and again it is not sure to be accepted. "Yes to infrastructure that Geneva needs so badly", it is with this slogan that a broad coalition supports the plan to decommission the Goutte de Saint-Mathieu in Bernx. On this 4.5-hectare land in the agricultural area, the state wants to build a guidance cycle, a vocational training school, and various other public facilities, but it faces referendums, who firmly defend the cultivated areas. La Cité de la musique en danger Another very disputed subject, but in the city of Geneva this time, the Cité de la musique. This architectural project signed by the Genevois Pierre-Alain Dupraz would be created in the heart of the Petit-Saconnex, in front of the Place des Nations. It would host the High School of Music (HEM), the Orchestre de la Suisse romande (OSR) and a room of 1580 seats. Funding would be provided by a foundation. Moreover, the opponents blame a lack of transparency on the source of the funds. The UDC, the far left and the Greens denounce a project which "will end up costing public authorities very much" and which will lead to the slaughter of 130 trees. This vote recalls another one: the so-called Jean Nouvel expansion project of the Museum of Art and History, financed in part by the Fondation Jean Claude Gandur, which mobilized the same actors against him and was rejected in 2016 by the Genevois. Will the scenario repeat itself on Sunday? Unanimity in the Jura All these objects, as we have seen, are fiercely contested. Let's finish with a subject that is unanimous in the Jura. In any case no one is openly opposed to it. This is the initiative "Equal Pay: Let's Realize!". Launched by the union Unia, it is – which is totally unusual – supported by the government and all political parties. The aim is to introduce concrete measures to end the wage inequality that still remains between men and women. In 2017, it was 23% in Jura. For this election, the stakes will be the number of yess that will come out of the ballot box.