A non-liberal to the CO2 OPINION law Climate protection is often associated with the new CO2 law, but it is legitimate to ask whether it will allow us to effectively solve the climate challenge? Will taking our wallet out of everything make us forget about our ungreen activities? Are we all entering, through this law, into a perfect world where the climate and the environment will be saved and preserved? This new law is, first of all, expensive! It is on the back of the consumer, who will have to pay all the new taxes and surcharges on the already existing charges, that the consequences of the probably most expensive law of our time are spread. However, for the sake of equality, we could expect both the normal citizen and the very large emitters of greenhouse gases to pay the high price? All companies will now be exempt from the CO2 tax. So far, this possibility has been limited to certain activities. Thus the common of mortals alone will bear the weight of this very expensive law. Meanwhile, the ordinary citizen – who has to deal with the increase in heating costs, the price of gasoline, the new tax on airline tickets and all the other hidden costs associated with this law – is entitled to wonder what happens to his money. Indeed, the CO2 law does not consist solely of new taxes and heavy price increases. The money will come from the ordinary citizen's pocket to accumulate to nearly 1.2 billion in a dark climate-related fund. That sum is titanium. It already sharpens many appetites. More than one billion for lobbyists, all actively engaged in the yes campaign. All this money is not only invested in climate-relevant projects (such as the building-related program), but as enshrined in the law, it can be used for "additional measures" that are free from the imagination of lobbyists. When the Young Liberal-Radials (JLR) are engaged, the accusation of serving only Mammon, the great capital, is not far away. Yet this law will satisfy with a lot of money, caught in the pockets of the citizen, so many people. And it is precisely as a liberal that the capitalism of connivance and the search for rent (rent seeing) must be fought, for they only rob the middle class! Is this law, which alone costs only the consumer, while saving large emitters of greenhouse gases, and distributing the money of the former to a long list of vile lobbyists, helping the climate? Do we achieve the objectives of the Paris Agreement with climate neutrality by 2050? Or at least the targets set by law for 2030? Even the supporters of this law concede that it is incomplete and that more ambitious measures must be taken immediately. So we wonder why we should pay such a costly bill, full of exceptions and subsidies, on the back of Mr Toutle-Monde, who will have to pay the price! While we should immediately introduce a coherent climate policy: in our view, the introduction of a uniform tax in all sectors for all greenhouse gas emitters with a limited number of emission rights would have been more consistent. Thus, and with this new law, while continuously reducing these rights, each company can trade these rights in a market by buying or selling emission allowances. A non out of liberal conviction, which prevents this redistribution of ordinary citizens to the pockets of many interest groups, only makes possible the debate for a better law. THOMAS JUCH CAMPINATOR EN, GE AND JU