Recycled concrete still struggles to impose For the sector's umbrella associations, building a sustainable economy in construction requires stronger political action. Among the solutions proposed: promoting recycled materials in public works Etienne Meyer At two months of the vote on the revision of the CO2 law, four umbrella associations in the construction sector call for the establishment of framework conditions adapted to the establishment of a circular economy in the sector. On Tuesday, the Swiss Company of Entrepreneurs, the Swiss Association of Recycling Materials Construction, the Swiss Association of the Cement Industry and the Swiss Association of the Gravel and Concrete Industry organized a press conference to present their proposals to meet the challenges posed by the climate objectives of the Confederation. This call comes at a time when a subcommittee of the National Council's Committee on the Environment, Spatial Planning and Energy has been working on this topic since autumn 2020. It is expected to publish the results of its work in May. But the sector's umbrellas fear that it will result in regulations that are considered counterproductive. According to industry representatives, targets to reduce CO2 emissions from homes will lead to increased waste generation in the construction sector. "Currently, the renewal rate of the housing stock is around 1% per year, and in order to achieve the climate goals it would be between 3 and 5%," says Gian-Luca Lardi, President and CEO of the Swiss Enterprise Corporation (SSE). An exemplary demand from the public authorities Today, construction accounts for 84% of waste generation in Switzerland, or 74 million tonnes, mainly excavation and demolition waste. "We are already recycling about 70% of demolition materials," says Gian-Luca Lardi. At the same time, however, the use of recycled concrete is only 20% in construction sites due to a certain reluctance to use this material. For the umbrellas, the public authorities, which account for almost half of the order book, could play an accelerator role by calling for the use of recycled materials. This under-utilization of recycled building materials has concrete consequences. "They are large stocks that accumulate at recycling sites," says Kurt Morgan, president of the Swiss Construction Materials Recycling Association. A part of the waste is exported abroad in border areas, but the weight of the waste materials and their transport costs mean that they are not exported very far." Their use would also make a stone two blows by reducing the share of waste put into landfills and by resolving the problem of the lack of local landfills. Legal Barriers Beyond setting an example, the umbrellas also call on the public authorities to remove the legal barriers that, in their view, limit the establishment of an efficient circular economy in the construction sector. "We are increasingly concerned about regulation from a spatial planning point of view," Morgan says. Waste recycling centres must be set up in industrial areas shared with other companies that do not want to have noisy and smelly activities near them." Another example discussed is the impossibility of using certain incineration wastes as fuels for cement production, which requires very high temperatures. "We could save an additional 400,000 tonnes of CO2 each year by using waste that is not suitable for conventional recycling as alternative fuels," says Gerhard Pfister, President of the Swiss Cement Industry Association. One way to increase the share of alternative fuels used in this industry, which is currently considered to be very polluting, is to increase to 70%. "These are a few examples. We must not act against regulation, we must accept it, but today there are contradictions that we can avoid," concluded Gerhard Pfister.