For a liberal environmental policy OPINION. By saying yes to the CO2 law, we continue to write Switzerland's success story in the sense of liberal and intergenerational responsibility, writes the National Councillor Jacqueline de Quattro Jacqueline de Quattro, National Councillor Each of us is anxious to leave an intact environment for future generations. The pandemic that we are going through has made us even more aware of the importance of preserving our natural resources and our environment. CO2 law is one way to achieve this. It sets the stage for a more sustainable world while providing the economy with the opportunity not only to be at the forefront of progress, but also to maintain and create jobs. A development model that favours both a liberal environmental and climate policy and respect for carbon neutrality. Winner, winner. Jacqueline de Quattro, National Councillor. Partien/Keystone Many societal issues are controversial between extremists and hypocrites. Common sense often struggles to be heard. The fight against global warming does not escape this phenomenon. In the extremist camp, there are some organizations that want to reach zero emissions by 2030, with little concern for paralyzing the lives of the population and the prospects for the economy. They are inspired by unacceptable authoritarian methods, worthy of the former USSR, whose CO2 balance was also disastrous. Switzerland doesn't need these sterile debates On the other side, there are hypocrites that begin by relativizing the problem and always end up saying that the proposed instrument is not the right one or that it is not the right time. They also point out that Switzerland is a small country, so its CO2 emissions would not have any influence at the international level. Wrong. A global problem cannot be solved without every one of them making their own efforts in accordance with their responsibility and economic potential. It is clear that the compliance of poor or emerging states with the Paris Agreement depends largely on what rich countries will do. A global problem cannot be solved without everyone making their own efforts Switzerland does not need these sterile debates between extremists and hypocrites that do not lead to any solution. The liberal-radicals have assumed their responsibilities and are committed to the CO2 law. This package of measures is a constructive, balanced compromise that gives companies room for manoeuvre and freedom of decision-making. A 50% reduction in emissions in 2030 compared to 1990 is a realistic target. Realistic but also effective. The CO2 law provides for economic incentives where they have effects, particularly in industry and construction. When incentive taxes are used, their product will not feed the state funds. On the contrary. Essentially, the population and businesses are given back to maintain the purchasing power and competitiveness of our economy. The PLR does not deny its values Much of the product is indeed allocated to support measures for technological innovation, such as, for example, synthetic aviation fuels, the development of construction materials to replace cement or biodegradable packaging instead of plastic. Great stakes for tomorrow's Switzerland. With the CO2 law, we are building on our country's innovation capabilities, which will enable us to secure important future markets. Undoubted added value for employment and research. In addition, innovation and technological progress lead to improved energy efficiency. Every kilowatt hour of energy saved gives us extra room for manoeuvre and brings us closer to carbon neutrality. By committing to the CO2 law, the PLR does not deny its values. However, we are for the truth of the costs. Those who consume more resources at the expense of future generations pay the price accordingly. By saying yes to the CO2 law, we continue to write Switzerland's success story in the sense of liberal and intergenerational responsibility. This is an opportunity for our economy and a duty to future generations.