"The CO2 law lays down a framework for finally beginning to reduce our emissions" In a joint statement, Swiss scientists support the revision of the CO2 law, which was put to vote in June. Three questions to Sonia Seneviratne, climatologist at the EPFZ Mattia Pillonel Sonia Seneviratne is a climatologist at the Swiss Federal Polytechnic School in Zurich. On 22 April, she and many of the world's scientists issued a statement calling for a yes vote on the revision of the CO2 law because of the climate emergency. "Time": The scientific world calls for the yes to the CO2 law. Why take a stand? Sonia Seneviratne: It is important for us to position ourselves, simply because there is an urgent need to act. It is essential that this vote is passed. If not, it would be catastrophic. The CO2 law provides a framework for finally beginning to reduce our emissions. It provides a number of objectives and incentives that encourage people to consume less fossil fuels. The initiative is pushing for behaviour that is more in line with the goals set out in the Paris Agreement. A refusal would make us take a huge delay. It cannot be said that the law is extremely ambitious, but it is an indispensable first step towards the right direction. What do you mean by "first step"? If we really want to be in line with the Paris Agreement, we need to set bolder goals. One of the problems of the CO2 law is that it includes emissions compensation abroad. In fact, our carbon emissions will not decrease by 50% in Switzerland, but rather by 38%. But if we want to stabilize global warming, the goal is obviously to achieve zero emissions. This is the next part, which has not yet been discussed in Parliament. The Federal Council suggested this target for 2050. After the vote, it is imperative that we continue the debate and get to zero as soon as possible. The net zero in 2050, is it a achievable goal you think? I think if the will is there, we can. Finally, we don't really have a choice. In case we don't get there, we'll have lost the chance to limit the warming to 1.5 degrees. You have to be aware of the consequences. Switzerland has ratified the Paris Agreement, and it was one of the countries that wanted to do so. It is a question of coherence in our future policy. In fact, we should even aim at zero net by 2040, if we want to ensure that the temperature rise is kept below 1.5 degrees for a lesser impact on the climate.