Biden poses as a gathering on climate ENVIRONMENT The US President invited 40 heads of state and government to participate in a virtual summit to open on 22 April, Earth Day. He intends to relaunch international engagement in the fight against warming PASCALINE MINET @pascalineminet It was one of the main campaign promises of candidate Biden. As soon as he was elected to the White House, the new US president hastened to realize his country's return to the Paris Climate Agreement, abandoned four years earlier by Donald Trump. As a result, he promised to organize an international conference to mobilize States in the fight against warming. This summit – purely virtual, pandemic – will take place on 22 and 23 April and will bring together the main countries emitting CO2, as well as a few others, particularly involved or directly affected by climate change (Switzerland was not invited). The US administration hopes that this event will serve as a catalyst for climate action, in a decisive year that will culminate with the next International Climate Conference or COP26 in November in Glasgow. Insufficient Promises Adopted in 2015, the Paris Agreement has set itself the goal of containing global warming at 2°C, and even if possible at 1.5°C, by the end of the century, compared to pre-industrial levels. In order to achieve this, all 196 signatory States have committed themselves to reducing their greenhouse gas emissions. Their promises are, for the time being, largely insufficient: they lead to a warming of 3°C, the consequences of which (increase in droughts, cyclones, and other extreme events, the disappearance of some ecosystems) would be very serious, according to scientific projections. In order to move closer to the 1.5°C target, the Paris Agreement provides for countries to arrive every five years with new, more ambitious plans to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions (these plans are called "nationally determined contributions", or NDC, in the UN jargon). The meeting was partly missed in 2020, due to the Covid-19 pandemic, which resulted in the postponement of COP26. Only about 50 countries (including Switzerland) reported revised NDCs, according to the count of Climate Action Tracker. The projects of the other States are therefore expected on a firm footing. Last year, however, had its share of encouraging announcements. China, as the world's largest emitter of greenhouse gases, has promised to achieve carbon neutrality by 2060 (which means that it will not have to emit more CO2 than it can absorb). For their part, the leaders of the European Union have agreed to cut emissions by at least 55% by 2030, when the British are aiming for an even more ambitious target of 68% at the same time. New promises could be made at the summit on 22 and 23 April. Already, Canada has announced that it is increasing its greenhouse gas reduction target by 2030 compared to 2005, to 36%, compared to 30% previously. But it is the United States that is expected at the turn of the day. "President Biden arrives at this summit with the need to repair the credibility of the United States after four years in the power of a president who denied the existence of climate change and who has done everything in his power to undermine the efforts made in his country to reduce greenhouse gas emissions," said John Podesta, former climate advisor to President Obama, at an online press conference. The White House announced that it would make known the US NDC nouveau before or during the virtual meeting. "We hope that it will be at least a 50% reduction in emissions by 2030, compared to their 2005 level," said Rachel Cleetus of the NGO Union of Concerned Scientists. Analyses have shown that this is feasible, but also that it is the minimum necessary to reach the climate neutrality target in 2050, already announced by Biden." Climate organisations also expect the new president to increase the funds allocated for the adaptation of the poorest states in the face of warming. It remains to be seen how the other countries, and in particular China, will welcome the American return to the climate battle. In Shanghai last week, the US climate envoy John Kerry, along with his Chinese counterpart Xie Zhenhua, issued a communiqué in which the two countries committed to cooperate on climate change and develop their respective strategies for reducing greenhouse gas emissions by the Scottish summit. "The relationship between the two countries has deteriorated considerably since 2015, when the Paris Agreement was negotiated," says John Podesta. But both have an interest in maintaining an open channel of communication on the climate issue." Blowout deforestation in Brazil The behaviour of other important warming actors will also be scrutinized in the coming days. On Monday, 19 April, the Kremlin announced that Russian President Vladimir Putin would participate in the virtual summit on Thursday. Arctic protection appears to be one of the few areas of cooperation between Moscow and Washington. Brazilian President Bolsonaro will also attend the meeting. He promised to end illegal deforestation by 2030 in his country, with financial support from abroad. But this announcement was received with coldness by Brazilian activists, as the cleared areas have been increasing in Brazil since the new president came to power. "Bolsonaro is a negationist. Since his election, there have been many setbacks in climate protection in Brazil; the increase in deforestation is only the visible tip of the iceberg. Both Brazilian civil society and the private sector are calling for climate action. But it lacks the necessary transparency and political will," says Izabella Teixeira, who served as Environment Minister for former President Lula. In September 2019, during Donald Trump's presidency, activists gathered in front of the Washington Capitol to draw the attention of power to climate change. The new president, Joe Biden, wants the United States to regain its leading role in the fight against warming. (YASIN OZTURK/ANADOLU AGENCY VIA GETTY IMAGES) "The relationship between China and the United States has deteriorated significantly from 2015. But both have an interest in maintaining an open channel of communication on climate issues" JOHN PODESTA, ANCIEN CONSULTING ON THE CLIMATE OF THE PRESIDENT OBAMA BUT ENCORE Switzerland's tough commitments Under the Paris Agreement, Switzerland has committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50% by 2030 from 1990 levels. In its recent inventory of greenhouse gases, the Federal Office for the Environment points out that their emissions fell only marginally in Switzerland in 2019 and that further measures are needed to achieve this objective. Such measures should be introduced in the revised CO2 law, which is subject to vote next June. (LT) The programs continue to increase PANDEMIA L-accalmie related to restrictions against Covid-19 will have been of short duration. A strong rebound in greenhouse gas emissions is expected in the grounded aircraft energy sector, reduced road traffic and idle plants: the Covid-19 pandemic and the measures taken to contain it have put a brake on global greenhouse gas emissions. Unfortunately, the impact of this crisis on the rise in temperatures is expected to be negligible, and the overall trend remains towards an increase in emissions, particularly in the energy sector. To reverse the trend, international coordination seems more essential than ever. Despite decades of global climate action, since the introduction of the Kyoto Protocol in 1997, global greenhouse gas emissions have continued to grow, on average 1.5% per year over the last decade, according to the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) count. They reached a record level in 2019, at 59.1 gigatonnes (or billion tons) CO2 equivalent, an increase of 2.6% over the previous year, due to the increase in forest fires. Hottest year 2020 Then came the coronavirus pandemic, which has greatly slowed the global economy. According to a study published in Nature, the impact of the measures taken by states to combat Covid-19 could lead to an overall reduction of 7% in emissions in 2020, the largest decline recorded in recent history. In a recent report, however, UNEP stressed that this reduction will have only a small effect on temperature increase: UN experts estimate that it will only correspond to 0.01 degree of warming avoided by 2050. In its annual report on the global state of climate, published on 19 April, the World Meteorological Organization reported that this temporary decline in emissions had had no noticeable impact on atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases. Countries "must act now to protect people from the disastrous effects of climate change," UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres warned at the presentation of this report, which also shows that 2020 is among the warmest year ever recorded, on a par with 2016 and 2019. In order to achieve the Paris Agreement's goal of containing warming to +2°C by the end of the century compared to its pre-industrial level, experts believe that greenhouse gas emissions should be reduced by 7.6% each year between 2020 and 2030. Some believe that proper "green" recovery plans would help to achieve this. But the signals are not encouraging. According to recent estimates by the International Energy Agency (IEA), energy-related emissions are expected to rebound in 2021 to the point of approaching their pre-pandemic peak, due to the recovery in global demand for fossil fuels, particularly coal. However, energy-related emissions account for about three quarters of the global total for all sectors. "This is a dark warning, which shows that the economic recovery after the covid crisis is to date anything but sustainable for our climate," said IEA director Fatih Birol, who called on governments to act quickly to contain their emissions. P. M. 0.01°C It is the warming that would be avoided by 2050, thanks to the emission reductions associated with the pandemic.