Homeowners' Association shoots against CO2 law The HEV takes a party for tenants, which it wants to protect against alleged forced renovations and forced terminations Andrea Martel «Living for everyone more expensive?» – «Destroying living space?» – «Return to the tenant's wallet»: The Homeowners' Association Switzerland (HEV) has conducted an intensive campaign over the past weeks against the CO2 law, which was launched on 13 July. The vote will take place at the next voting time. This upsets the other associations from the residential and real estate sector, because they see things differently. The tenant association accuses the HEV of misleading statements and fear-making. The new law had little financial impact on the tenants; for this reason a slogan had been dispensed with. The association Casafair has also spoken and goes to court with the HEV. Casafair represents the owner side like the HEV, but is significantly smaller and usually does not have the hay on the same stage as the homeowners' association. Marked words What HEV statements are involved, and what can be said about their correctness? "Forced renovations": The HEV speaks in its advertisements of forced renovations at 1.2 million. Real estate. In fact, the revised CO2 Act imposes a remedial obligation, but only in certain cases. Anyone who needs to replace his heating and wants to stay with an oil or gas heating is de facto obliged to renovate his property energetically. For a heating replacement, a new upper limit for CO2 emissions applies. This can only be achieved with a good energy standard for fossil heating. The alternative is to switch to non-fossil heating (heat pump, wood, district heating, biogas). Then even with the new CO2 law no renovation is necessary. There may be cases where insulation measures are mandatory for older buildings when a fossil heating is replaced because the heat pump does not have enough power. But according to experts, this is the absolute exception. In such cases, wood heating would probably be the better solution. "Requirements for tenants due to remediation obligations": As mentioned, there is a remediation obligation only in those cases where a fossil heating is replaced by an equivalent. But even in these cases, empty announcements are not a must. Energetic renovations of the building envelope can also be carried out in the inhabited state. This does not mean that there will be no empty announcements for renovation projects, because larger modifications in the inhabited state are usually associated with a higher effort and sometimes difficult to accomplish. But it's not forced terminations. "Massive increased demand for electricity": According to the HEV, the pressure to switch to non-fossile energy sources leads to a massive increased demand for electricity. That's right. The Federal Office of Energy expects a quadrupling of electricity consumption by 2050, taking into account electric vehicles and heat pumps. This could be detrimental, for example, from the perspective of security of supply in winter. In contrast, hidden electric heaters (they can no longer be installed today) are not heat pumps. In general, 20 to 30% of the heating power comes from electricity, the rest comes from the air or from the soil. In a poorly insulated property, the electrical content on cold winter days can be higher, but it is not likely to be more than 50% electricity. «Raubzug auf dem Wallemonnaie der Tenter»: The HEV quotes in its advertisements a study of the Federal Offices for Energy (BfE) and for Housing (BWO), according to which the rents for a 100 square meter apartment allegedly around 140 Fr. Price per month. Apart from the fact that there is no such number, it is important to bear in mind that the study dates back to 2015. As Marianne Zünd of the BfE points out, heating costs have changed in the meantime. For example, the CO2 levy at the time was 60 Fr. per tonne of CO2 (today it is 96 Fr. ), and would pump systems were sometimes more expensive than today. According to the BWO, it is also not correct to refer to the results of this study in connection with the CO2 law, because this does not take into account the influence of the CO2 levy. A recent study by Wüest Partner from 2000 leads to a more optimistic conclusion. Climate-friendly renovations and the exchange of heating systems, especially in older buildings, could reduce the total cost for tenants, the report says. Investments can be partially transferred to rent, but also reduce ancillary costs. According to Zünd, it is also important that tenants benefit from the redistribution of the CO2 levy. A family of four received 348 Fr. on the sickness insurance premium. With the new CO2 law, this family will receive a refund of 668 Fr. per year. «Immense additional costs for residential owners»: This redistribution to the population also applies, of course, to residential owners. The revised CO2 Act not only sets standards in the building sector, but also provides for financial support for the building owners. In total, the CO2 levy amounts to a maximum of 450 million. Fr. per year available for the building program. This is not intended to reduce the investment costs that are due when the heating is withdrawn or has to be renewed due to its age. With the CO2 law, these will be higher in the case of existing oil or gas heaters without. This can put some homeowners in financial trouble. However, according to the BfE, these higher investment costs are regularly amortised over the life of the heating system. If you're better at insulating your house, you'll need less energy and have lower energy costs. And if you switch to renewable heating systems, you don't have to pay a CO2 levy afterwards. Higher utilization possible In addition, and this often goes under in the discussion: In the case of replacement new buildings and comprehensive energetic building renovations, according to the revised CO2 law, there is the possibility to expand the living space. Cantons can allow a higher use of the property. Thus, the owner has more space available to use for himself or for renting his apartment. It is certain that the new CO2 law will directly affect many homeowners, and this will happen in the foreseeable future. According to the BfE, more than half of the residential buildings are still heated with oil or gas. Whenever the heating or burner needs to be renewed in these buildings, the owner is faced with the decision whether to switch to renewable energy or whether to renovate his building. This may not be a problem for financially strong institutional owners, but for a couple of pensioners. And maybe even for the tenants. This is less because of possible higher rents, because you save energy costs and the CO2 levy. However, major renovations often mean empty terminations, and a move often means higher rental costs.