For the first time, Swiss estimates the cost of the ticket tax The skepticism in the airline industry compared to the ticket tax in the CO2 Act is great Michael von Ledebur The mining plans of Swiss have made it clear: The microcosm of Zurich Airport is in a deep crisis. The airline announced a fleet reduction and a staff reduction of 20 percent in May. The Corona crisis is a burden in the short term, but what is even worse from an industry point of view: it also obscures the long-term prospects. Travel behaviour will change structurally – according to the forecast. You are still far from the business of old days at Zurich Airport. The prospect of an additional burden of a ticket tax of 30 to 120 francs on billets for departures from Switzerland increases the pressure in addition. Costs could be suspended The ticket tax is part of the CO2 Act, which we signed on 13 March. The vote will take place at the next voting time. Swiss is now presenting figures on the NZZ for the first time on how high it estimates the costs of the levy, calculated on the basis of 2019: between 200 and 250 million Swiss francs, i.e. about half of the annual profit of 580 million Swiss francs in 2019. Swiss assumes that it would largely have to pay the levy itself. The Lufthansa subsidiary comes to this conclusion because it predicts that you can hardly charge higher ticket prices. Passengers would have many opportunities to evade other European airports, where ticketing is much lower than in Switzerland. The counter-argument is that the levy would affect all airlines. However, they are affected to a far lesser extent because they offer much fewer flights from Switzerland, the Swiss counters. Swiss spokesperson Karin Müller says that the idea is wrong that the ticket fee can simply be put on top of the price. "Ticket prices are created on the market for supply and demand." One would try to price the ticket tax wherever possible, but one would have to shoulder it largely, because one had to exist with the total price including taxes in a global competition. This money was lacking for investments, including in climate measures. Competition for the airport In the discussion, Flughafen Zürich AG represents a position similar to that of Swiss – but it can take a much more relaxed approach. It only provides the infrastructure. However, if the levy were actually to be reduced, this would have an impact on the frequency and thus indirectly on the business of Flughafen Zürich AG – due to lower fees on the one hand and lower customer frequency in the shopping malls on the other. With regard to the latter, however, one does not expect to have a large impact on the country side, since the airport is also an important commuter hub of public transport, says the airport spokesman Manuela Staub. There is also a danger that passengers would evade other airports, for example in southern Germany. Basel could become a competitor where one can evade the French sector of the Euro-Airport. Swiss has fought back against the levy for years in particular. Nevertheless, it seemed that the industry had agreed that the levy would no longer be averted. But one point has rekindled the opposition: the plan of how to use the depleted funds from the levy. Andreas Schürer, the managing director of the Zurich Open World Committee and thus something like the chief lobbyist for the interests of Zurich Airport, says: "No one likes to stand there as an eternal stand. The need for action on the climate issue is there, and aviation must make its contribution." But it was not acceptable that the industry should withdraw funds and use them for remote purposes. That's why the committee opposes the law. The criticism is unanimously shared by the industry. It is assumed that the levy will not give rise to too great a steering effect, but rather serve to fill the subsidy pot. Stephan Widrig, CEO of the airport, recently wrote in the in-house "Airport letter": "The aim is not to weaken aviation, but rather to become climate neutral as such, which seems realistic, above all, through the use of sustainable aviation fuels." In fact, about half of the estimated billion francs from the levy will be refunded to the population via the health insurance premiums. With the other half, a climate fund is being pruned, which in itself does not only benefit aviation. Widrig speaks of a "wide range of petitioners, from subsidies to building renovations, to research and agriculture". The Dübendorf GLP National Councillor Martin Bäumle has worked hard to ensure that the climate tax flows into the promotion of climate-neutral kerosene. He could understand that the industry representatives did not enjoy an additional levy, especially since Swiss was in a difficult situation without fault. But the step is inevitable, especially since air transport is the only one exempted from the CO2 levy and from the mineral oil tax. On the issue of the distribution of funds, Bäumle is on the same side as the aviatics industry. But with regard to the law, he is much more optimistic. In fact, the draft regulation on the law published in April allows for a number of conclusions: while it contains binding commitments for the promotion of night trains and the like, it also includes a passage that essentially concerns the promotion of innovation for the artificial production of sustainable synthetic fuels from renewable sources. That's what the aviation industry wants. Air, water and sunlight Switzerland has a special starting point for climate-neutral fuel. At ETH, appropriate research is carried out, resulting in several start-up companies. Fuel can be produced from air, water and sunlight. The technology, called power to liquid in the jargon, has been tested in the laboratory, but the product is still far too expensive for airlines to afford. The idea was to finance the start-up of production on a larger scale, which would then lead to lower prices. Today, the litre costs ten times more than normal kerosene – in about a decade, the price can approach that of kerosene, industry representatives estimate. But only if they invest. There is another problem, namely the lack of concrete, far-reaching projects. It is quite possible that at least in the first years money will also flow into other climate projects that are remote from flight, says Peter Metzinger, FDP community in Dietikon and fellow fighter Bäumles. It is crucial what happens after that. Metzinger and Bäumle have founded a company with other partners with the aim of accelerating the switch to CO2-neutral kerosene worldwide. The two people say that making money is not in the foreground. A rare example of a concrete project is the Swiss company Synhelion. She works with the Italian oil company Eni, among others. Already in 2023, a plant in Switzerland or Germany is to be put into operation, which can produce 10,000 litres of CO2-free kerosene per year. According to an estimate by the company, this figure can be increased to 700 000 tonnes by 2030 – that would be almost half of Switzerland's annual kerosene consumption. But this is only about technical feasibility – the financing has not been clarified. The climate fund can finance projects with up to 80 percent. But the question is unsolved: who should buy the product, which will be much more expensive than kerosene at the beginning. The airlines will not be able to do so with the tight margins in the business. The airline industry wants a subsidy from the Climate Fund to be used to artificially reduce the price. That is not yet foreseen. Not in principle against The Swiss emphasises that one is not opposed to the law, but that the current design of the air ticket tax regulation is counterproductive, since it reduces the investment power of Swiss airlines massively. Basically, the need for action on the climate issue is recognised and over 8 billion have been invested in less-emission aircraft within a decade. Flughafen Zürich AG is positioned against the law because it does not offer a suitable instrument to reduce CO2 emissions in aviation. Peter Metzinger, who clearly supports the CO2 law, says that there is no alternative for the industry. "The demand for a ticket fee will certainly not disappear." However, the fact that the tax leads to a change in behaviour is neither realistic nor objective. "In many cases, airlines must be enabled to use climate-neutral kerosene." This is possible under the law. The airport lobbyist Schürer says it is a matter of consideration – as how big one assesses the problem and that the purpose commitment is not fixed and clearly defined. If the law is adopted, the aim must be to remedy this lack of implementation. The demand was simple: if money was already drained, it had to be used for solutions that made flying more environmentally friendly.