"Everyone has to start with themselves" – "That's just not enough" How do two entrepreneurs see the CO2 law? The two medium-sized companies Chrigel Hunziker and Mathias Chunen crossed the blades. Christoph Eisenring and Giorgio V. Müller Christoph Eisenring Giorgio V. Müller The Swiss company is responsible for one thousandth of the global CO2 emissions. Mr Hunziker, Mr Tchanen, why do we need a CO2 law at all? Chrigel Hunziker: If you argue like this, I wouldn't have to pay any AHV contributions, these alone don't make the AHV sustainable. We have responsibility for what we do. Switzerland has taken a descent path, but it is not sufficient. That's why we need this law to make something move. Mathias Tchanen: As an entrepreneur, I also see responsibility for the environment. However, it is not necessary for the state to operate with environmental taxes, which are ultimately covert taxes. I consider this to be an anti-innovation measure because it deprives us of resources. We need to reduce CO2 emissions from our own engines, not on the basis of state requirements. Do you support climate neutrality by 2050? Chanen: It is a very ambitious goal. But I would like to contradict Mr Hunziker that we are only moving because of laws. The fact that houses are much more energy efficient than before is in the prime interest of homeowners. We haven't even installed an oil heater in the past 15 years. When we built ourselves a few years ago, we chose a wood chips heating because we wanted something sustainable, even if it was more expensive than gas. Hunziker: If everyone would do that like Mr. Tchanen with his wood carving plant, it would be wonderful. But it's not like that. Increasing CO2 dues on fuel oil and natural gas improves the return on economical technologies. This steering effect should not be underestimated. The opponents say that the CO2 law is a pity for the competitiveness of Swiss companies. What's that supposed to mean? Chinan: A supplement up to 210 Fr. Instead of currently 96 Fr. per tonne of CO2 on fuel oil and natural gas damages the site. Poland, for example, has a surcharge of less than 1 €. This gives the location a cost advantage. The steering effect of the new law is also disputed. Do you have a vivid example of this? Hunziker: A few years ago, our project managers drove large combinations so that they could take something with them to the customer. On average, the combi used about 10 litres of petrol for 100 km. Today we have hybrid cars that only need 4.5 l. When the new CO2 charge on fuel of 12 Rp. per litre, we save 1500 Fr with every hybrid car per year. With 10 cars, that's 15 000 Fr. annual. That's important. The company Tchanen has also recently purchased hybrid vehicles. Tchanen: I wanted to do something good for the climate. But I don't want the state to tell me how exactly I have to do this. Does the law restrict personal freedom? Hunziker: I don't think so. If you have flown on vacation four times a year before and now fly only three times because of the ticket fee, you save a quarter of the emissions in air traffic without life getting worse. Chanen: The revenue from the ticket tax, however, only half goes back to the population, the rest leaks into this climate fund. Is there a risk that the climate fund, which is alimented with CO2 dues and the ticket tax, will become a self-service shop for lobbyists? Hunziker: When I propose a pilot and demonstration project, it is not simply noded, but carefully examined. This has nothing to do with self-service. Only a good project gets money. Especially when it comes to seasonal energy storage, we are not where we should be. That is why these technologies must be promoted. Tchanen: I'm against pots like this. In agriculture, subsidies are being criticised, and now we are introducing new ones. I do not understand that such a fund supports industries that have been on their own feet so far. If we want to avoid CO2, everyone has to start with themselves and say: I don't need these luxury goods anymore, I can do without them. So you have an open ear for the climate movement, Mr Chanen. This also demands renunciation. Mr Chanen: In any case, we are not honest on this issue. If we put solar cells on the roof everywhere, then we should acknowledge that they come from countries that hardly meet our standards of environmental protection and human rights. What price increases will there be if the CO2 law is adopted? Chinen: With concrete, a CO2 surcharge of 1 Fr. per cubic metre. Hunziker: But please don't forget the relations: We are talking about a cost increase of 255 Fr. to 256 Fr. per cubic metre, that is 0.4%. Tchanen: We will also feel it with the fuel, and the production of the bricks will be more expensive because heavy oil is used. We count on the materials of price increases of 3 to 5%. Both of you are active in areas with a certain distance protection. If the costs for all domestic competitors rise, then nothing changes in your competitiveness. Tchanen: As of today, it may be so. The competition from southern Germany is low, because the construction industry is booming there. 15 years ago, however, we experienced different times when many German companies invaded our territory. This is still the case in civil engineering. Two out of three truck deliveries come from abroad for the construction of the flooring in the canton of Thurgau. This is free market. However, the German trucks emit more CO2 than if a regional supplier did. Because of the CO2 Act, your company would have additional costs of between 30 000 and 50 000 Fr. Mr Chanen, as you have calculated. How do you get this amount? Chanen: That's how much it will be if the fuel price is 12 Rp. and the price of materials is taken into account in the purchase of materials as in the case of concrete. Less accurate I can estimate how much more expensive auxiliary materials such as bricks and insulation materials will be. Will your company also incur higher costs because of the CO2 law, Mr Hunziker? Hunziker: We heat with district heating from the waste incineration plant, drive hybrid vehicles and 2 electric cars, there we will feel nothing. The 30 vehicles with internal combustion engines will cost a little more. We have been trying to reduce our emissions for 20 years, so all of this is no longer a big cost factor for us. According to the Home Owners' Association, rents will rise because of the CO2 law. Is that true, or is it panicking? Hunziker: The rents will not increase, at most the heating bill. I live in a house with a minergie standard, which is heated with district heating, there is nothing more expensive. If you don't want to, you have to pay more. That's what you want to do to get people off the oil. So the fear of rising housing costs is unfounded? Chanen: No. According to calculations of the house owner association, the rent for a 4.5-room apartment will be around 140 Fr. rise per month. Investing in a building will feed into the cost of living. The tenant will feel this in the wallet. Hunziker: But there is something coming back, Mr. Chunen. If you install a ground probe heater, the heating costs will decrease. The energy costs will fall by 80 to 90%, and you do not have to pay CO2 dues. That's great! In the case of such proposals, it is always controversial what they mean for jobs. Will new, "green" jobs be created, or will higher costs destroy jobs? Hunziker: Of course there will be more jobs. If Switzerland wants to be net zero in CO2 emissions by 2050, it must renovate the existing building park energetically. This means four to six times as many building permits, for example for facade renovations and insulation. These are also areas in which you, Mr Chanen, are active. And for us it would mean more heating and ventilation. Chechens: The number of jobs is increasing, but there are also those that disappear abroad and no longer return. For highly qualified professionals and students at the offices, additional jobs will be created, but for low-skilled people it will be less because we are no longer competitive. This will encourage a two-class society. Do such structural shifts have only adverse effects for Switzerland? Hunziker: You can also see the shifts optimistically. Many countries, especially in Europe, are subject to stricter conditions. Switzerland is not the only country to do something about global warming. Tchanen: It is simply the case that the Swiss workplace is becoming more expensive with the CO2 law. I fear that companies that already have locations abroad will increasingly rely on them and shift jobs there in the future. Thus, we find that more technical draughtsmen are employed in Portugal because they draw construction plans at a quarter of the local cost. Hunziker: We Swiss have proven that we can cope with structural change. Winterthur once had tens of thousands of industrial jobs at Rieter, Sulzer and ABB. Today these companies have only a few hundred service jobs here. Our office is where Sulzer's headquarters used to be. We made the leap from the industrial city to the service and school city. Winterthur pulsates! Are we too small-minded in Switzerland to solve such big problems as global warming? Tchanen: I agree 100% that we must tackle this problem. But we have to solve it on our own initiative and not with an overloaded law – I have never received such a thick vote message as now, that's a book. Hunziker: It's your fault, you took the referendum. But that is wonderful, that's democracy! "The Swiss workshop is becoming more expensive with the CO2 Act. We expect price increases of 3 to 5% for the materials.» Mathias Tchanen Mathias Tchanen (left) and Chrigel Hunziker both lead similar large family companies in second generation.