The CO2 Act is unsightly, but correct With the new CO2 Act, Switzerland is making its contribution to limiting the dramatic global temperature rise. If she steals herself from responsibility, she gives off a pathetic image. David Vonplon The first run ended with a big bang. In December 2018, the National Council sunk the CO2 Act. The Paris climate agreement, ratified by Parliament a year before, threatened to degenerate into a worthless piece of paper in this country. FDP and SVP had diluted the template to such an extent that it fell victim to an unholy alliance of left-green and SVP. The reactions to the collective failure were harsh: Switzerland had buried the climate protection, it said in the "Tages-Anzeiger". The NZZ compared parliamentary work on the CO2 law with the construction of a Lego castle in kindergarten: for hours the children would have tinkered with it and fought long and passionately, where which blocks come to, only to throw the structure at the wall at the end. Restart was necessary Now, two and a half years later, Parliament has reassembled the Lego blocks. It has become a decent castle. And in retrospect, it turns out that politics has drawn the right conclusions from the embarrassment. It took a reboot to allow the parties to revise their positions and jump over their own shadows. Under the impression of the protests of the climate youth and the green coup in the national elections, the parties succeeded in reaching agreement on a CO2 law that also meets their name. Above all, however, it needed a reversal of the FDP. If the free sense had largely fouted itself about climate protection before, his stand councils now distinguished themselves as drivers and clocks for the second, significantly stricter edition of the CO2 law. With Damian Müller and Ruedi Noser, two of the party's heavyweights set themselves a binding target for CO2 reduction in the domestic market. The party offered a hand for an increase in fuel prices, higher charges on fuels, a ticket fee, stricter standards for replacing oil and gas heaters and a highly endowed fund for climate measures. It was high time that the politicians came to the Räson in Bern: with the new CO2 law, Switzerland is finally fulfilling its promise of Paris and is making its contribution to limiting a global temperature rise to well below 2 degrees compared to the pre-industrial era. To this end, it will reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 to half of the 1990 emissions. This goal is shared today across the party's borders. Not even the SVP dares to attack it anymore, at least not directly. The consequences of climate change have become too clear in recent years, including in Switzerland. The average temperature has risen by 2 degrees – almost twice as high as in the global average. And this already has consequences: heat waves and heavy precipitations are increasing, there is a tendency to dry summers and a melting of glaciers. Only fools continue to deny that global warming is real and will have significant consequences for landscape, nature and people. Running on a free-board would be fatal The opponents of the law, the SVP and the associations of fuel oil and gasoline importers, car dealers, road transporters and Swiss airfields, are leading to the field that Switzerland's share of the global CO2 emissions is negligible with less than one percent. That is why efforts for the expensive law can be saved. But even if Switzerland cannot save the climate, this is no reason to ride on a free-board. Addressing the climate crisis is a global project. Only if all States respect the principle of reciprocity can it succeed. If rich Switzerland is not responsible, it is a poor image – and gives the other countries an alibi to push the reduction of greenhouse gases into the long bank as well. The CO2 law is a complicated work. It's far from being perfect. Some measures have dirigistic features and lead to unnecessary subsidisation. Nevertheless, the CO2 law essentially relies on the right instruments and largely does without bans. It is trying to give fossil fuels a price to reduce demand in favour of climate-friendly forms of energy. This is not in contradiction with liberal values. Because with the levies and taxes, environmentally and climate-damaging activities are only approximated to the cost truth. In a liberal society, such intervention by the state is justified in so-called external effects, such as the burden on others on the environmental costs that one creates. It is therefore right that the costs of oil and gas heating should be artificially increased by levies, so that the replacement of oil and gas does not re-use the old, polluting technology, but renewable energies. It is right that frequent drivers in high-consumption vehicles should be asked to pay more. They are thus responsible for the environmental costs they impose on society with their behaviour. A levy on airbillette is also legitimate – although it would be better to charge cheap kerosene in a European or global combination with a new levy. But gasoline, diesel, fuel oil, gas and flights are not simply expensive. A large part of the collected money will be distributed back to all citizens in the same year in the form of cheaper health insurance premiums. The bottom line is that people and companies with low carbon footprints are financially rewarded, while at the same time preventing money from remaining with the state. The opponents of the law, especially the SVP, regularly suppress this circumstance. They claim that all those who have already had a hard time, the trade, the rural population and even the people with small wallets, will be burdened. However, the argument of the SVP does not stand up to a check of facts: calculations by the NZZ show that the inhabitants of urban areas are asked to pay more than those of peripheral regions. Also, the redistribution of CO2 dues tends to improve people with lower wages compared to good earners. Generously alimentated subsidy pots are only annoying that the application of the polluter pays principle is not carried out consistently enough. In fact, all the revenues would have to be redistributed. Instead, Parliament has created a new subsidy pot with the climate fund. In this special fund, funds flow from the higher CO2 dues and the new air ticket tax, which is expected to exceed one billion Swiss francs each year. The fact that the successful building program for the renovation of houses is continued is just barely acceptable. However, the construction industry, cleantech companies, railway companies, innovative start-ups as well as cities and municipalities also receive prospects for subsidies. Although the funds in the Fund are largely earmarked, Parliament's budgetary authority is responsible. However, the criteria for awarding funding are vaguely formulated. It is sufficient to demonstrate that a project contributes to the achievement of the climate targets. This opens the door to a state-owned clientele industry: why, for example, SBB should receive money for cross-border night train connections remains a mystery. And representatives of the mountain regions are already calling for sustainable tourism projects to be subsidized from the pot. But it cannot be the purpose and purpose of the Climate Fund to end up sponsoring e-Trottinett paths and Lama trekkings. However, because of these shortcomings, it would be wrong to reject the new CO2 law. The existing template may not win a beauty prize, but it is what is currently possible as a common denominator. If the law on the urn fails, this is called «Back to field one». The fight for climate protection would start from the beginning, and the political struggles would probably become even harder. The chances that the parties will find under these signs a compromise that is fundamentally different from the present CO2 law are low. In view of the hardened fronts, a climate policy stance for the current decade would probably be delayed by years. But time is pressing. Switzerland simply cannot afford a longer standstill in climate protection. The bottom line is that people and companies with low carbon footprints are financially rewarded. At the same time, the tax is prevented from remaining with the State.