Chinese tourists pay for Swiss pensioners The ticket tax includes a redistribution to foreign passengers David Vonplon Switzerland is a country of frequent flyers. Swiss people fly twice as often abroad as the residents of neighbouring countries. And they fly on average more than the Americans. The new air ticket tax is intended to dampen this desire for travel. Depending on the distance, 30 to 120 Swiss francs will be paid per departure, who will travel from a Swiss airport abroad. This is what it wants the new CO2 Act, which we will be discussing on 13 May. The vote will take place at the next voting time. The surprising thing about the new tax mechanism is that although only half of the income is distributed back, the majority of the Swiss population – at least 90 percent – benefits from the airline tax, according to the federal government. Anyone who makes holidays in Europe once a year by plane pays 30 francs for a short-haul flight and receives 60 francs in the form of discounted health insurance premiums. And even people with two European flights per year pay nothing net. One inevitably wonders: How can this bill be dealt with? Only a minority pays on it The fact that only a small minority is on top of the total, the research institute Sotomo explained that the majority of CO2 emissions in Switzerland are accounted for by very few: the top 5 percent of frequent flyers with their private flights alone are responsible for around one third of the emissions of aviation. The unequal distribution of flight behaviour has the consequence that most Swiss people are financially improved by the levy, according to a study. But that's only half the truth. What has been misled so far: The cashier is mainly asked for foreign passengers who use Swiss airports. Because they have to pay the ticket tax from Switzerland as well as persons residing in Switzerland. However, they are excluded from the redistribution of funds. How much foreign passengers contribute to the revenue from the air ticket tax is shown by the statistics of international airports in that country. Zurich Airport recorded 8.3 million passengers in the Corona year 2020. Only just 41 percent of the passengers who picked up in Kloten came from Switzerland. The rest comes from Germany (11 percent), another European country (29 percent), North America (10 percent) or the Far East (4 percent). If foreign transit passengers who do not pay a ticket tax are withdrawn, the foreign passengers who withdraw from Zurich still account for 46 percent. Prior to the pandemic, the origin of the passengers showed a similar picture: in 2019, only 44 percent of the departing passengers also had their residence in Switzerland, according to surveys conducted by Zurich Airport among departing passengers. Less transit passengers, foreign passengers accounted for around 40 percent. In Basel-Mülhausen airport, which is close to the border, the shares of foreign and Swiss passengers paying the air ticket tax are the same, for example. Geneva Airport declares on request that it does not provide statistics on the nationality of its passengers. However, there are few reasons to assume that the shares of Swiss and foreign passengers differ significantly from those of the other major airports in Switzerland. The bottom line is that foreign passengers are expected to receive 40 to 50 percent of the income from the airline tax. You will pay several hundred million for the ticket fees without even seeing one of these money rapping. This is in the light of the fact that the planned air ticket tax before the pandemic crisis, according to estimates by the federal government, would have generated annual revenues of around 1.3 billion Swiss francs. This means that foreign passengers will be re-distributed to Swiss households: The tourist from China pays for the retired person from Birmensdorf, the southern German businessman for the family from Mettendorf. If only people living in Switzerland had to pay the tax, the bill would also be significantly worse for the Swiss population: 40 percent would then receive less money than they have paid, as calculations by Sotomo show. In addition, not only Swiss households benefit indirectly from the taxes paid by foreign passengers, but also Swiss companies. Half of the revenue from the air ticket tax flows into the climate fund and is used to promote technologies that reduce greenhouse gas emissions. These include guarantees and loans to innovative companies. These funds also provide financial support for research into synthetic kerosene. Unwanted side effects If Switzerland introduces the ticket tax, it creates an incentive to avoid the Swiss airports. There is a risk that some of the foreign passengers, such as those from neighbouring southern Germany, will evade other airports, says Bettina Kunz, Spokesperson of Zurich Airport AG. It expresses the fear that in future a considerable part of its passengers could use the French sector of Basel-Mülhausen airport to circumvent the Swiss air ticket tax. Basel-Mülhausen Airport is located in the French territory, but has a Swiss and a French sector. Today, more than 90 percent of flights are operated under Swiss traffic laws. However, as the French environmental tax of EUR 2 63 for a European flight (Economy class) is about one tenth of the Swiss CO2 surcharge, this could soon change. "Airlines operating under Swiss traffic laws could operate under French traffic laws in the future without further delay and thus avoid the Swiss air ticket tax," says Claire Freudenberger, Spokesperson of Basel-Mülhausen Airport. If undesirable side effects are to be avoided, the environmental taxes of the two countries should be harmonised. In fact, the low-cost airline Easy Jet, on request, declares that a switch to the French sector will be considered when a ticket tax is introduced. All airlines that would start there would then have a clear price advantage.