The economy is divided in the CO2 Act The CO2 Act imposes additional burdens on oil imports, road transport and aviation. Directly affected industries are therefore fighting against the law. However, a majority in the business community supports the proposal. The prospect of pots of money, the acceptance of climate targets and concessions to companies are essential reasons. Hansueli Schöchli We all belong to the economy. But in the context of political opinions, the term "economy" refers primarily to companies and their associations. The CO2 Act, revised by the Parliament, which the people voted on in June, provides for dissent in these circles. Economic committees play an active role in both supporters and opponents. The revision of the law is intended to continue climate policy by 2030. The core objective is to halve the Swiss emissions of greenhouse gases by 2030 compared to 1990. The bill contains a mixture of additional environmental taxes, stricter regulations for buildings and vehicles, and an expansion of the subsidy pot called "climate fund". The CO2 levy on fuel oil and natural gas currently amounts to 96 Fr. per tonne; maximum would be 120 Fr. per tonne possible. The revision aims to raise this ceiling to 210 Fr. This is the first time that we have seen a significant increase in the number of tonnes. In addition, the maximum fuel surcharge increases from 5 to 12 Rp. per litre. Furthermore, a new flight billet-discount of 30 to 120 Fr is planned. Per flight. Patt in the trade association So it is not surprising that the opposing economic committee has associations of fuel oil and gasoline importers, car dealers, road transporters and Swiss airfields. These industries feel the cost of legislative revision directly. According to the opponents, the Swiss law project is not only expensive, but also useless, because it has virtually no influence on the global climate. The trade association had also initially supported the referendum against the law. But for the vote the association decided to release the vote. Because in the Chamber of Commerce, the parliament of the association, there was only a small majority against the proposal in February. The fronts run partly across the industries. For example, the Gastrosuisse Association has announced the No-Parole, as many hotels and catering companies that have been bagged by the pandemic can "carry out the extra costs" from this template. On the other hand, the association's head of Hotelleriesuisse had decided the Ja-Parole, as there was no alternative to effective climate protection. There were also different voices from the retail trade. The proponents in the economy seem to put more weight on the balance overall. A pro committee, which according to its own statements includes around 200 companies and associations, presents its arguments to the media this Monday. Particularly striking: The committee does this together with the Economiesuisse Economic Association. According to the opinion, there was a "very clear" majority in the internal exodus for the yes-parole of Economiesuisse. Among the key stakeholders in Economiesuisse are associations of the chemical/pharma industries, banks, insurance companies, the machinery industry and construction. In 2017, it was even different in 2017, in the run-up to the "Energy Strategy 2050", the picture was even less clear. Economiesuisse had at that time dispensed with a voter's slogan because of the strong opposition, especially from industry. The change in attitudes is not only explained by differences in the two templates. According to observers, greater awareness of climate change and the perception of greater activism also play a role abroad. Economiesuisse supports not only the climate targets for 2030, but also the "net zero target" of the Federal Council for the emissions of CO2 from 2050. Despite criticism of the climate fund and the airbillet levy, the Economic Roof Association considers the present revision of the CO2 Act as a compromise and an "indispensable intermediate step towards achieving the climate targets". In addition to the acceptance of the climate targets, three factors in particular should explain the support of this proposal by a majority of economic actors: honeypot. The proposal will significantly expand the subsidy pot. According to the federal government, the planned climate fund will have annual revenues of around 1 billion in normal years (without the pandemic brake for aviation). Fr. ==References== This planned subsidy machine is an invitation for lobbyists and for wasted money and therefore is critical of supporters of the economics textbook. At the same time, however, the presentation in the sense of the political textbook becomes more attractive for some sectors. Such industries are also strongly represented in the pro-committee of the economy. These include sectors such as construction, environmental technology, building technology, solar energy and the whole advisory cake on the topics of environment and energy. Image and business opportunities. Climate awareness is also a good thing in the economy today. In terms of image, it is cheaper to be perceived as part of the solution rather than as part of the problem. The label "Sustainability" also offers new business opportunities. This applies not only to industry, but also to the financial sector (which now has the slogan "sustainable financial centre"). Discharge. The bill improves the situation for certain companies directly affected. One element often mentioned concerns the extension of the possibility for all companies to exempt from the CO2 levy by agreement with the Federation to reduce the CO2 emissions. Until now, this possibility has been limited to certain activities. The discharge for large companies is the participation in the trading system for emission rights. The Swiss system has been linked to the EU trading system since 2020. There is also no fundamental opposition from the energy-intensive sectors such as cement, steel and paper production. This is what Frank Ruepp, President of the Energy-intensive Industries Interest Group, says. According to Ruepp, energy costs in these sectors often account for 15 to 25% of the total cost. Ruepp welcomes Switzerland's inclusion in EU emission allowances trading and the planned expansion of the possibility of exemption from CO2 emissions through target agreements. However, the community of interests will not make an official slogan for the vote unless the draft of the Federal Council has been submitted for the implementation regulation. The regulation had to clarify the important issue of the allocation of emission rights.