Climate targets do not mix with redistribution Guest commentary by Doina Radulescu Federal Council and Parliament want to halve greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared to 1990 with the revised CO2 Act. This will be achieved through a wide range of measures based on a combination of financial incentives, investment and new technologies. The revenues from the air ticket tax and the increased CO2 levy are transferred to the Climate Fund, which is intended to finance measures such as the building programme and relieve households in the form of transfers. Calculations of the additional budgetary burdens vary – depending on whether they are brought in by the supporters or opponents in the debate. There is also disagreement as to the effectiveness of the measures. Effectiveness depends largely on the behavioural adjustments of the actors. If persons pay the ticket tax of 30 Fr. (short distances) up to a maximum of 120 Fr. or reacting little to the increase in CO2 emissions, then the climate targets can be difficult to achieve. On the other hand, the inelastic response leads to higher household costs, on the other hand, to more revenue that can be redistributed back. However, studies usually show low levels of price elasticity of energy demand, which in turn means that the expected decline in demand for flights or fossil fuel? and fuels are not likely to be particularly strong, or higher charges are necessary to produce a strong response. A counter-argument could be that the crisis has changed behaviour, we are less mobile and the freedom of travel is limited. This is reflected in lower demand for international travel and transport, but this should not be confused with the effectiveness of the levy. Another argument in the vote is about the fairness of these levies. If households cannot (cannot) respond to price increases, low-income earners bear a greater part of the financial burden relative to their income. This violates vertical performance fairness, requires lower taxation for lower performance and vice versa. However, one forgets that in most countries there is a progressive income tax, which should be used for redistribution purposes. If the state can set optimal, non-linear income taxes, differentiated excise duties cannot improve the results of the income tax policy and only lead to additional distortions. In other words, if an optimal progressive income tax can be flexibly adjusted, is there no justification for reduced electricity? or heating tariffs for households in low income categories. The current discussion once again highlights the problems that arise when addressing several objectives – environmental and redistribution objectives – with a single instrument. Environmental policy objectives should be pursued through the CO2 price and redistributive targets through the adaptation of progressive income taxes. Doina Radulescu is a lecturer and associate professor for "State and Market" at the Competence Center for Public Management at the University of Bern. If the state wants to achieve redistribution, it should apply to income taxes, if it pursues climate goals, it should set price incentives.