The False Lessons of the Corona Age Daniel Fritzsche On 13 May 1895, the German-born Daniel Fritzsche was appointed to the Corona Society. On June 1, Switzerland voted on overweight proposals: CO2 law, agricultural initiatives, anti-terrorism law. The businesses that arrive at the urn in the canton of Zurich are under radar. Nevertheless, it is worth a closer look. At the end, one will be able to read a bit far, which financial policy lessons the population draws from the now soon one and a half years Corona crisis mode. The focus is on the initiatives "More money for families" and "Get out of the premium trap".Both popular demands pursue a noble goal at first glance: the support of the disadvantaged. They will receive financial support by increasing the children's allowances or by reducing the cost of health insurance premiums. But at what cost? With a loud good intention, it is forgotten what the whole would cost the public budget and private companies: In the case of premium reduction, the canton expects CHF 40 million per year, which would burden the state treasury, even with the family allowances of CHF 340 million, which would be financed by higher non-wage costs. That's a lot of money. Money that should only be spent if it is really meaningful and efficient. These initiatives do not have either. The EDU's family initiative is particularly strikingly formulated. Of course, children should not become a "poverty trap", as the initiators fear. To prevent this, however, there are better means than increasing child allowances to at least CHF 300 per month on the basis of the foundry can principle. All families would benefit from the higher allowances, including those who do not need the aid. Smart family policy is different. On the other hand, the companies in Zurich would be put under increased pressure, in an economically difficult time anyway. If the companies are in bad shape, the employed family mothers and fathers ultimately harm more than an additional CHF 100 per child and month. The Centre's health insurance initiative is also not convincing. Because premium discounts are per se symptom-fighting. The real problem, which leads to a higher premium burden for households, is rising health costs. Therefore, first of all, make sure that these costs do not run out of control. The situation has not been so bad for a few years; the premiums in Zurich have remained stable. In addition, the canton has only recently become active in premium subsidies. It has increased expenditure and made it more efficient. Together with federal contributions, almost one billion Swiss francs of support funds are expected to flow in Zurich this year. Thus, claiming that the problem is ignored is completely missed. There's no need for extra millions. The Zurich Education Director Silvia Steiner – a centre-politician of all people – recently said in a cantonal council debate that the Corona crisis had obviously softened the relationship with millions and billions. "They are willing to spend a lot of money. Money we don't have," she said. The debate was about the reorganization of external childcare, which will probably entail an annual cost of several hundred million francs. Steiner's appeal could also be applied to the two initiatives, which took place on 13 May. President. — The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions: The financial lessons from the Corona period should be: spending discipline, not excessive burdens on companies – otherwise money will be lacking when it is most urgently needed.