«We are all late» The greenhouse gas emissions would have to be reduced, says François Launaz, President of the Importers Association Auto-Switzerland. In a conversation with Herbie Schmidt, he says why he still considers the CO2 law unnecessary and the planned mobility pricing to be unfair. François Launaz, do you think that the CO2 law will reduce the number of cars? No, this law will not change the behaviour towards the car in Switzerland at all. Whether the fuel price rises by 10 cents or not, the driver does not feel at all. The idea of the Federal Council to steer people away from car traffic with the increase in fuel prices does not work. If I drove from my place of residence in Freiburg to Geneva and back, it would cost me a maximum of two francs more. I don't choose the train at this extra cost. For this reason, I do not believe that the fuel price increases will provide the desired steering effect. What is the CO2 law supposed to do from your point of view? The interests are clear: the left want more money, the Greens no longer want cars. Overall, however, the CO2 law is politically something for which I have no understanding. Transport of passengers and goods on the road is responsible for one third of carbon dioxide emissions. If we are doing well, the CO2 fund will give us between one and at best twenty million francs for the construction of the charging infrastructure at the place of residence. However, we should receive a third of the CO2 dues in accordance with the calculated share of CO2 emissions in order to decarbonise road transport. From the point of view of our industry, that would be the real meaning of a CO2 law. But in the present form, the law is unnecessary for the car industry. Why? We have emission targets, which are becoming ever more stringent. Car manufacturers invest billions in green technology. When the next Euro 7 emission standard comes – we assume from 2025 – diesel engines will no longer be able to comply with it. The new investments are subject to fines paid by Swiss importers. The pressure on manufacturers and importers is large enough, since it does not need any additional charges by the users. Is the targeted reduction of emissions not mandatory for you? We are not against the upper limit of 95 grams of CO2 per kilometre. We know that emissions need to be reduced. No car company claims the opposite. However, it is very disturbing that many manufacturers are pushing their plug-in hybrid cars into the market to shine low CO2 on paper. The reality is quite different, because only a small part of the plug-in drivers charge the battery of the vehicle every day to save fuel. The plug-in hybrid drive is a good technology as long as it is used according to purpose. And the technology is useful as long as the charging infrastructure is still incomplete. How can it be that the customer is suggested with the plug-in hybrid to buy a product that consumes little? The buyer is completely free of charge how often he charges the battery so that he can drive emission-free. This means that the manufacturer's billing represents a much lower consumption than in the real world. This technology is just a transitional solution. As soon as the combustion engines are banned – and this does not take long – plug-in hybrid cars disappear. In the meantime, such vehicles only make sense if they are frequently charged. This can be compared to the buyer of a fuel-efficient gasoline truck, who drives his car very high-touring. This cannot be prohibited, even if it consumes more than indicated in the sale. You have to have a little confidence in the reason of the drivers. But in five years' time, this discussion will be off the table, and then we will no longer have these technologies. Back to the charging stations. What about the charging infrastructure? There is also the problem that many drivers cannot charge their electric vehicle at home. If such home charging stations are missing, there is also no incentive to buy a plug-in hybrid car or an e-mobile. But no one in the federal administration cares about this issue. Mrs Sommaruga pretends that this is not a problem. We don't think so. There are not many employers who are willing to set up charging stations at the company parking lot. We have had four charging stations at Auto-Switzerland's headquarters for six years. But there must generally be a better organisation for charging infrastructure at home and at work. Do you believe in the citizen's right to the charging station? That's exactly how I see it. There must also be the right for tenants to build charging stations in underground garages and on parking spaces of residential buildings. In addition, there must be a federal subsidy system, because if tenants move away, they will not be able to take their charging station with them. That's how it works in France and Germany. Is Switzerland lagging behind other countries from your point of view? A simple bill is enough. If the electric car market develops in the same way, we will put in place around 400 000 additional plug-in vehicles by 2025. Three-quarters of the customers are tenants. So it takes several hundred thousand charging stations – an enormous increase. How much money do we get from the new CO2 fund? Almost no franc. Do you see here the central problem with the CO2 law? The politicians have decided with which environmentally friendly cars we should drive in the future. But they do not take responsibility for the infrastructure. Is there enough right to the charging station and corresponding state support to help the electric car break through? What about the real estate owners and electricity suppliers? I recently wrote a letter to Mrs Sommaruga asking her about the suppliers. The federal government wants us to cover around 40 percent of the market by 2025 with plug-in vehicles. The industry is ready, the products are rolling or already there. The Federal Council cannot also impose the charging infrastructure on the car manufacturers and importers. When the first cars with internal combustion engines came to Switzerland, the car manufacturers did not build petrol stations. So: Up to 12 raps per litre of fuel we also say yes, but the revenue must then be put into the charging infrastructure. As an association of auto importers, it is also your task to make yourself heard accordingly. That's right. We are a member of the Federal Electric Mobility Roadmap, but the other members must also do their job, not just us. We're all late. And you're running out of time, because the CO2 standards are constantly increasing. That's what worries me. There are also other ways to ask road users to pay to alleviate the low tide in the fuel tax system. Think of mobility pricing, an interpretation of the polluter pays principle. The position of Auto-Switzerland is clear: Mobility pricing yes, but to finance the road infrastructure, not as a steering levy. Commuters who live in the poorly developed hinterland and have no choice but to go to work in rush hours are the victims. The gap between good and bad earners is exacerbated by this. What about the different types of drives? I believe that electric motorists should also make their contribution to road maintenance. Then please also cyclists who also use the roads. There are cities that are now ready for pilot experiments with mobility pricing. But they just want to let the drivers pay, which is not the basic idea. And the experiments are supposed to last up to four years. It doesn't take that long to find out if mobility pricing works. It's all about making driving unattractive. Other means of transport are often not affected. Do you believe in a structured solution that complies with the polluter pays principle? We need mobility pricing. But it must be coordinated and applied to all. It could be solved in a similar way to the heavy traffic charge with which we have had good experience. I think there's still a lot of work to be done here. We have made our views clear in the consultation process. It can't be that every canton, every city has its own solution. Then we're threatened with a relapse into the Middle Ages. Do you expect cities that only allow emissions-free traffic in the city centre? The trend is in this direction. It's a bit like the Corona vaccine. Those who are vaccinated receive more privileges than those who are not vaccinated. These ideas for reducing the pollutants in inner cities are not yet ripe, but the time will come when we will be confronted with this idea. However, noise is also one of the emissions. Right. In Freiburg, for example, the pace in three quarters of the streets is reduced to 30 to reduce noise. The train runs through the middle of the city and produces much more noise than car traffic. Where's the logic? All means of transport must be quieter, not just cars. Which would bring us back to the hidden steering action. Correct. Unfortunately. As long as the cities are ruled left-green, this direction will strengthen. Is it wrong to electrify inner-city traffic? It may be too early to think consistently in this direction. This would also require significantly better charging infrastructure in inner cities. That is not the case yet. But in 2040 it will look different when the majority of the vehicles are electric. What would it look like in 2030? I believe that in ten years' time, a million of four million registered vehicles in Switzerland will be plugged in. It will take years for all existing cars with internal combustion engines to disappear completely from the road. But if there will be corresponding driving bans, it may be that today's buyers of new petrol can no longer drive a meter in ten years. State scrapping premiums would then be useful, as they have already existed, in order to be able to quickly ban out of traffic outdated drives. But Auto-Switzerland is primarily about new cars, which you like to show at large trade fairs. Most recently, the situation around the Geneva Motor Show was unclear, with Auto-Switzerland sitting on the Board of Trustees. What's going on? We found a partner for the next trade fair. But not an investor; we have remained free. The partner comes from the Middle East and wants to organize a big car fair in his own country, we will support him in this. How big is the interest of car manufacturers in the Geneva Salon? The registration for the Salon 2022 has just begun. We expect negative effects from the Corona crisis and have created the Geneva International Motor Show a little smaller and shortened by two days. The car manufacturers also wanted this. Accordingly, the number of visitors will also decrease. Does the concept change? Everything will be a little smaller, but also more dynamic. We are aware that we can no longer carry out a static car salon as before. Newly we have a small team that is employed at the Geneva Salon. Prior to that, Palexpo staff worked in the mandate. What is missing now are the exhibitors. Does the VW Group worry about the fact that in autumn 2021 the first IAA in Munich cancelled the appearances of the Seat and Skoda brands? Yes and no. We knew that the VW Group had long thought about whether it would exhibit in Munich. Munich as a location with the house power BMW may be a hindrance. In Geneva, however, we have already felt in recent years that some brands did not participate anymore. But as long as we do not have clear cancellations, there is hope for a good Geneva 2022 salon. Other locations in Switzerland are not eligible for us.