He has always wanted to be relevant to Reto Knutti for twenty years, investigating how the global climate warms up – now he publicly applies the new CO2 law Angelika Hardegger One night eight years ago, Reto Knutti was there when climate history was written. It was in Stockholm. He sat in a conference room, facing delegates from 110 countries. Knutti worked through the night. He was interrogated by the climate diplomats. For four years, the climate physicist at ETH had been working on a report on the global climate. The Uno had commissioned the study, covering 1500 pages. Now the countries negotiated the heart of the work: a 36-page "summary for politics". China, Saudi Arabia and Brazil wanted to delete a specific paragraph from the summary. He addressed the question: How much CO2 does the world still have to "train" to control warming? The question was of a scientific nature, but it was also highly political. And it concerned Reto Knutti personally: What would remain of four years of hard work on the global climate report? A chapter on "cumulative CO2 emissions", hidden between 1500 pages that nobody would read? Or a CO2 residual budget for the world? A warning to politics? The question of what remains is the question of Reto Knutti's life. He's been investigating how the global climate warms up for twenty years. He's sitting in front of his prognoses and desperate about politics. Switzerland is now voting on a new climate policy. The revised CO2 Act aims to halve emissions by 2030. Knutti publicly promotes a yes, together with over a hundred Swiss scientists. He's being hailed from the right for taking the party, he's being hailed from the middle-left. This has always been the case: for some, Reto Knutti is an activist in the science mantle. He's a hero to the others. "Now politics must act" Reto Knutti was once interviewed on the ETH roof for his work. The scene is reminiscent of the weather forecast on Swiss television. He spoke of westerly winds, tropical storms and satellite images. In the background it dawned, clouds passed by in the sky. Perhaps Reto Knutti would have been happier if he predicted the weather instead of the climate. He always wanted to do something that was "relevance", and for many people there is hardly anything more relevant than the weather of tomorrow. Certainly not the weather in a hundred years. Knutti grew up in the ski resort of Gstaad, his father was a primary teacher, and his mother was a merchant. He studied physics because physics applies mathematics, he says: «The mathematician seeks proof that there is a solution for a problem. I don't care if there's proof. I am interested in: Is the solution useful to something?» Knutti's career is closely linked to that of his doctoral father and mentor: Thomas Stocker, climate physicist at the University of Bern. Stocker was once described by the "World Week" as the world's most important climate researcher. (And the magazine is critical of him.) He supervised Knutti's doctoral thesis, persuaded him to pursue his career at the Academy, and later brought Knutti to the IPCC. On the night of the Stockholm negotiations, in 2013, Stocker sat next to Knutti on the podium. The two had already prepared a global climate report six years earlier. Knutti wrote about the state of warming at the time. With hundreds of colleagues, he assessed that the warming was "clear" and that the rise in temperature was largely made human. Knutti says: "We had the feeling at the time: Science has spoken. Now politics must act." Then the Uno climate conference in Copenhagen failed. That shook his world view. "It was admittedly a naive and natural science understanding of the world." He was faced with a mystery: how can politics remain inactive when the facts indicate danger? Knutti has been trying to solve the mystery for years. From the big question he answered many questions: What is the weight of facts in the political discussion? What role does the supplier of facts, science play? Is science just supposed to provide facts? Is she supposed to put facts in it too? Knutti studied politics with the curiosity of the natural scientist. The closer he got to her, the more he became an actor from the observer. The translator In the Stockholm conference room, at 5 a.m. in the morning, Reto Knutti sat in front of several empty coffee cups. The negotiations on the climate report came to an end. He looked in tired faces of delegates. He could be happy with himself. Knutti had proven himself in cross-examination. The CO2 residual budget remained in the paper to politics. The idea was at the beginning of the net zero emissions target, which many countries have adopted since then. Last week, the German Constitutional Court referred to this. In the controversial ruling on the Climate Protection Act, it wrote that "it should not be allowed to consume large parts of the CO2 budget under comparatively mild reduction loads" to a generation. Knutti himself had once said in the New York Times that the budget idea was "a different way of saying that time is running out of us." Knutti always finds a different way to say things. He's a very talented translator. This is the reason for most of its popularity. Knutti translates scientific studies into simple language and complex problems into metaphors. When he explains to viewers the simplification of scientific models, he folds a paper plane. If he presents the state of climate research, he describes a semi-finished puzzle: "There are still some pieces missing. There are still blind spots. But you can see with half of the parts: Aha, it's a tiger." The Uno World Climate Council is currently preparing a new report on the state of warming. Knutti is not involved, he says: "We can still calculate on the seventh decimal place how great the human influence on warming is. But that helps us little further with the question: What do we do with it?» You can translate it like this: Reto Knutti has lost the desire to puzzle a bit. He recognized the tiger. He wants to warn people about the tiger now. «Bla, bla, bla, bla» The media house Reuters has recently published a ranking of climate researchers worldwide. Reto Knutti ranks 38th, a colleague of ETH's among the most influential ten. It is called Sonia Seneviratne, is a Western Swiss citizen and counted 50 citations in the Swiss press archive last year. Knutti had over 500. His language talent made him the favourite of the media. Knutti comments on Joe Biden's climate plan, the hundredth strike by Greta Thunberg, the left no to the CO2 law and the right. He comments on the Migros sustainability campaign, the net zero target of the canton of Lucerne, the snow in the Corona winter and the sun in summer. He's been keeping a drawing of the daughter for years. She drew the father in a white shirt next to a speech bubble, which says: "Bla, bla, bla, bla, bla". Reto Knutti has long since ceased to belong to the group of scientists who did not know anything to start with attention. But at the beginning of the career little hinted at a symbiosis with the media. He was a number child and was afraid of lectures at school. The sovereign appearance in front of the camera is based on hard work and practice, says Knutti. "I realized at some point: when it comes to the climate, I can speak confidently. I've been researching this for twenty years. So I can contribute at least as much as everyone else." A question of power Translators have power. Perhaps the most powerful interpreter in history was the woman next to Spanish conqueror Hernán Cortés. It has been overlooked by historical research for 500 years. Then she was discovered to be a genius of language: when the Spaniards conquered the Aztec Empire, she was the only one who understood all sides. One realized: The translator was a consultant. Maybe she was even the chief strategist of the whole Conquista. That is why translators are mistrustful: if the translation is displeasing, the translators are sued. They can work selectively and tendentiously. Reto Knutti's critics accuse him of both. For the «World Week» he is a red-green reed, sometimes a climate alarmist, then a climate pope, then a climate shaman. The SVP climate politician Christian Imark calls him "left activists". Knutti represents the scientific consensus of climate research. He has shifted the limits of what science can and should do in politics. Historian Caspar Hirschi recently wrote that the fight against climate change had "set the rules in the way of science and politics out of the way." Climate experts would have faced the challenge of clarifying the dramatic nature of a creeping crisis to politics. The boundary between expert knowledge and activism had been dissolved. Knutti says ETH was founded to think of the Gotthard Tunnel. "It is still our duty today to contribute to the socially pressing issues." ETH should not be an ivory tower. But where is the border between "to be no ivory tower" and activism? Knutti's moving on her. Sometimes he crosses them. This makes him a projection screen for all those who distrust the elites. In a row with Gorbachev On one evening last October, Reto Knutti stood on Berner Bundesplatz. He watched the premiere of the Lichtspiel on the Bundeshaus facade. The title of the film was: «Planet Hope», Planet of Hope. Lianen rose up at the Federal House, a tiger walked through the picture. Later, Reto Knutti's face was projected to the Federal House – in a row with Mikhail Gorbachev, Nelson Mandela or Henry Dunant. The "Berner Zeitung" commented on the selection as something arbitrary. Knutti says he has never sought the role of ambassador for climate change. He also says that he felt "a certain satisfaction" that evening at the Bundesplatz in Bern. "As science – all of us together – we have succeeded in showing that global warming affects us all. She is relevant." He felt that something remained. Knutti represents the scientific consensus of climate research. He has shifted the limits of what science can and should do in politics.