The Homeowners' Association warns against a massive increase in the cost of living New CO2 limits are said to cause enormous costs when replacing oil heating – opponents speak of fear-making David Vonplon In Switzerland, over one million housing buildings are heated with fossil energy. If homeowners spend longer on oil or gas, their residents will have to expect higher energy costs. The new CO2 Act provides for an increase in the levy on fuels from today's 96 francs to 210 francs. A first step is already set to 2022 with an increase in the levy to 120 francs. The surcharge per litre of fuel oil then cheats 32 rappers, 7 rappers more than today. However, the new law contains another provision, which is often excluded in the voting debate: for example, existing buildings will in future have a new limit value for the CO2 emissions of buildings. If the heating needs to be replaced in a residential building, the output per square meter of heated area from 2023 on must not exceed 20 kilograms of CO2. In five-year steps, this limit is then reduced by 5 kilograms of CO2 each and is zero from 2043 onwards. "Too high a pace" It is this upper limit that has prompted the Swiss Home Owners' Association (HEV) to go to the barricades under the CO2 Act. "The federal government is thus proposing a pace that is incompatible with the renewal cycles in the building sector," says Director Markus Meier. He warns of an enormous cost pressure that many homeowners could not afford to keep financially. To illustrate its position, HEV has calculated the impact of the new CO2 Act on housing costs – both for owners and tenants. He has commissioned certified experts from the cantons' Building Energy Certificate (GEAK) to show the renovation costs required for four fossil-heated residential buildings in order to reach the applicable legal limits in the future. The residential buildings are three single-family houses and an apartment building with three rental apartments, which were built between 1940 and 1975. The reviews, which are exclusively available to the NZZ, come to a conclusion that makes you listen. In order to replace the oil heating with an air-water heat pump and to allow an exclusive heating by it, a six-digit amount is required for all buildings. The 1941 single-family house, which was partly renovated in 2010, incurs costs of 144,000 francs. In the case of the other two single-family houses, the investment amount is even more than 200 000 Swiss francs – after deduction of federal and cantonal funding. In all cases, the profitability calculation resulted in a net loss in the four- or five-digit range even after 25 years. The Federal Office calculates differently The renovation measures even apply to the apartment building at 369 000 francs. These lead to heating costs falling from around 97 000 francs to less than a third. Nevertheless, according to HEV, even after deduction of this saving, for each of the three 31⁄2-room apartments, the net income is 126 francs more rent per month. The invoice also does not cover the mentioned objects if the homeowner again relies on oil or gas heating when replacing them. "Although fossil heating is not explicitly prohibited in the new CO2 law," says HEV Director Meier. "In practice, however, the new limit value and the steep lowering curve generate so high a cost that they are equivalent to a ban." Even those who own a partly-animated house have to renovate the heating replacement if they want to continue to heat fossil. According to Meier, no less than three quarters of the total 1.6 million residential buildings in Switzerland are affected by the measures described above, with cost consequences up to the six-digit range. The statements of the HEV are in stark contradiction with the statements of the Federal Office for Energy (BfE). This always emphasizes that the investment costs for climate-friendly heating systems may be higher than a new oil and gas heating system. However, considering the entire service life, these would generally be significantly cheaper, mainly thanks to lower energy costs. In addition, building owners would benefit from a higher market value of their building. The reason for the disintegration of the estimates is that the HEV not only calculates the purchase and installation of the heat pump as a cost block during the renovation, but also the insulation measures. The latter account for between 60 and 70 percent of all objects. Meier emphasizes that the installation of heat pumps in older, poorly insulated houses requires virtually always a renovation of the building envelope. This is because heat pumps otherwise only worked inefficiently and thus did not shed the same heat energy as fossil heating. But is this really true? Proponents of the CO2 Act contradict the arguments of the HEV with vehemence. "This is where pure worst-case cases are used, which are hardly visible in practice," says Kathy Steiner of the competition association Casafair, who is committed to climate-friendly building and living. The HEV was obviously concerned with fear-making in the vote. According to Steiner, the HEV undermines and falsifies various important points in its calculations. For example, in the examples, the subsidies for the renovation of the building envelope would not be deducted and costs for the renovation would be added, which would be incurred anyway. The tenant association also contradicts the tenant association Switzerland strongly criticises the calculations of the HEV. "The claim that three-quarters of the buildings need not only heating replacement but also renovation is not proven and beyond reality," says Vice President Michael Töngi. In the examples of the HEV, the costs of renovation were very high. "Our calculations show that the costs in a typical apartment building are a lot lower." Töngi accuses the HEV of having stopped looking at it. Heat pumps have made great progress in efficiency in recent years. Today, unsanitated houses would also be equipped with a geothermal pump, especially larger properties. "This is technically possible, and the performance is sufficiently large," says the Green National Council. A study by Wüest & Partner confirms Töngi's findings. Last year, the real estate company analyzed the energy renovations of twelve apartment buildings. In ten cases, the value of the property increased, and eleven even resulted in a reduction in gross rent.