Can I use the new CO2 law to replace my old oil heater 1:1? If the heating fails, house owners like to use the proven oil or gas heating when replacing the heating. However, the new CO2 law will make the requirements much stricter. Long-term planning will be worthwhile. Christof Forster, Bern Delivery of fuel oil by tank truck: The new CO2 law will further reduce demand. Gaetan Bally / Keystone Now quickly replace the oil heater before the CO2 law comes into force: With such advertising, heating installers are currently trying to convince home owners to replace their old oil burner with a new one. Oil heating is a comparatively cheap option if you only look at the initial investment. But the rush is really indicated: can homeowners with a yes on the 13th. June to the revised CO2 ActOnce no oil burners are installed? There are 2.3 million properties in Switzerland, of which three quarters are residential buildings. The buildings account for a quarter of Switzerland's greenhouse gas emissions. Since 1990, the output has fallen, also in absolute figures and with 2 million more inhabitants and the increase in living space. Nevertheless, there is still a great potential for CO2 reduction in the building sector. Parliament therefore also applies the new CO2 law to real estate. From 2023, a greenhouse gas limit will apply to buildings. Per square meter of living space and year, the output shall not exceed 20 kilograms of CO2. Every five years, the value drops by 5 kilograms. Cantons that have already revised their energy laws can postpone the new limit values by 2026. On the date of the closing date at the beginning of 2022, this is expected to be around 20 cantons. Strict set in the CO2 Act This is a strict set. Thomas Ammann of the House Owners' Association says: "Three quarters of residential buildings do not reach value". If they want to continue to heat with oil, they need to renovate their building. However, it is not enough to simply change the windows. "Besides the windows, external walls and the roof must be energetically renovated," says Olivier Brenner of the conference of cantonal energy directors. It quickly incurs a cost of 100,000 francs. However, homeowners can also switch to a renewable heating system. Heat pumps are popular. Other alternatives are wood heating or connecting to a district heating network. Although such heating systems are more expensive than oil or gas heaters, they are cheaper than the overall renovation of the house. Definitely no longer possible will be the 1:1 replacement of an oil heater 2033. The limit value is 10 kilograms CO2 per square meter. This can not be maintained even with the best insulation with an oil heater. Those who use gas have a little more time. Gas heaters emit a quarter less CO2 than oil burners. But even with gas, a 1:1 replacement of the heating from 2028 is only possible if the house is extensively renovated. The new CO2 law is a step towards net zero, which the Federal Council wants to achieve in 2050. "There is no free way," says Marianne Zünd of the Federal Office of Energy. Homeowners advise them to start planning renovations early, to tap them and to put money aside. In many cantons there is funding for the energy renovation and installation of a renewable heating system. As a rule, the cantons contribute around 10 percent of the investment costs. In Freiburg only very few oil heaters still exist.Many cantons have already created facts before the vote. Currently, more stringent energy regulations apply to buildings in 13 cantons. They are based on the model regulations of the cantons in the energy sector. In 2014, the cantons agreed to strongly harmonise the cantonal energy targets. Some cantons such as Bern, Aargau and Solothurn have to take a new start because their implementation proposals failed on the urn. But in other cantons the climate strike movement brought momentum into the matter, hesitant energy directors took courage and took their pennant-ready templates out of the drawers. In the canton of Freiburg, the revised energy law has led to an astonishing change in behaviour. In 2020, in the first year after entry into force, 617 oil heaters were replaced by only 18 with the same technology. This corresponds to 3 percent. In 82 percent of the cases, homeowners opted for a heat pump. The rest was on district heating or wood firing. In other cantons a similar development can be observed. With the new heaters the ratio between fossil and renewable has reversed. In the cantons with the new regulations, renewable heating systems have become standard. New buildings are practically only heated with renewable systems. It is exciting that this development has taken place, although cantonal regulations go less far than the national limit set by the new CO2 Act. In 2014, the cantons agreed that renewables will cover at least 10 percent of the energy demand in the case of a heating replacement. This corresponds to half of the heating requirement for hot water. Some cantons go beyond that. The steering levy reinforces the effect Apparently, the minimum requirement was an important driver of the switch to renewable energies. "Many owners, who now have to deal with the topic, come to the decision: I will make a sustainable solution," says Brenner. Thus, cantonal regulations are often far outperformed, because many homeowners are equally fully opting for renewable solutions. Brenner says that such heating systems are more favourable after deduction of subsidies and taking into account the increasing CO2 emissions over the entire life cycle, also plays a role in decision-making. Here, too, the law sets out to promote the switch to renewable energy: with the increase in the levy on fuels. The premium can rise from 96 francs today to a maximum of 210 francs per tonne of CO2. Converted to the litre of fuel oil, this results in a maximum surcharge of 55 instead of 25 centimetres. According to the Federal Government, the levy has been shown to contribute to the trend of decreasing emissions of fuels. At today's level, the share of the final price is between 20 and 30 percent – or between 10 and 20 percent for natural gas. The gradual increase will increase the steering effect. With the maximum rate, an additional charge of around 900 francs per year would be applied to a smaller single-family house with 140 square meters of living space and a consumption of 21 litres of fuel oil per square meter. Two thirds of the levy is distributed back to households. Mortgages for retired people The houseowners' association rejects the new CO2 law. Many homeowners could not afford the renovation measures resulting from a heating replacement, says Ammann. In many houses, switching to air-water heat pumps is not useful. In poorly insulated buildings, heat pumps are hidden electricity heaters. In addition, according to Ammann, older homeowners often no longer want to deal with a complex renovation. If you receive a modest pension, you often do not want or can not increase the mortgage. In such cases, the new climate fund of the Federal Banks could hedge against risks. Discussions with cantonal banks have shown that retired people have access to bank loans for ecological renovations, says Brenner of the Energy Directors' Conference. As long as it was more difficult, it would have objects located in peripheral locations – for example, in places with strong emigration. Despite the official appeasements: For some homeowners, the CO2 law is obviously a stress. If assumed, sales of oil heaters are expected to increase temporarily. This experience was experienced by various cantons before the entry into force of their new energy regulations. Such an effect cannot be prevented, says Brenner. The advertising of the industry will definitely be received by some homeowners.