Disputes over the Voice of Science Hundreds of researchers are giving the yes-parole to the CO2 Act – activism or intellectual commitment? Angelika Hardegger «Ladies and gentlemen, climate change is becoming a climate crisis.» For example, Reto Knutti, climate physicist at ETH Zurich, is opening an advertising video for the CO2 Act, which is currently being played on the Internet. The words are backed up with dramatic music. Later in the video Michael Hengartner, the highest ETHler in Switzerland, appears. The fact that scientists are so prominent in political campaigns is unusual. Now they're still hanging out. More than a hundred leading researchers issued the Yes-Parole on the CO2 Act on Thursday. Climate change is real and human-made. Switzerland was heavily affected by the effects, they wrote in a joint appeal. "Science clearly takes a position on the CO2 law." The facts are clear. It needs a yes. The CO2 Act aims to halve Switzerland's greenhouse gas emissions by 2030. Federal Council and Parliament have committed themselves to this in the Paris climate treaties. The time is pressing, it is said in the appeal. Humans have increased the CO2 concentration in the air by 50 percent since industrialization. "Comparable values are several million years ago, long before there were people at all." Researchers as activists The appeal was launched by a group of ETH climate physicist Reto Knutti. The climate researcher Thomas Stocker has also signed. Stocker and Knutti enjoy worldwide reputation as researchers. For political opponents, they are stimuli. Christian Imark, the National Council of the Social Democrats, says: "The appeal exposes people once more as activists." Imark accuses the so-called scientists of impermissibly cutting the facts. "The opinion suggests that there are other ways of reducing CO2 emissions. For this we need neither socialism nor bureaucracy." The harsh reaction shows that the scientists launch their appeal in a heated mood. The Corona crisis has marked the question of what science can and should do. Are experts supposed to provide only facts? Should they interpret facts? Should they express themselves concretely on political decisions? May they? The more than a hundred scientists have given an answer with the CO2 parole. The need for appeal was undisputed, says Reto Knutti. "I had sent the first e-mail to my colleagues at eight o'clock one evening. At midnight I already had fifty promises."Lobbyists interpret facts Knutti sees the opportunity to strengthen the voice of climate science in the current expert debate. Science cannot make political decisions, he says. But it must also interpret facts and figures. "If she fails, the lobbyists alone will. The pandemic is a wonderful example of what this leads to: then the president of the employers' association interprets what 30 000 infected people per day mean. And he is doing it with crystal clear interests."Knutti's facts about the climate are clear: if Switzerland says no to halving emissions and if others do the same, it becomes uncomfortable. "Then we move unchecked towards 3 degrees of warming compared to pre-industrial times. With massive impacts on agriculture, health, the availability of water – for the whole of life." The SVP and the oil lobby are fighting the law. The fuel oil will become more expensive, diesel and gasoline will also. The middle class is being scrapped, the opponents say. Knutti replied: "The benefits outweigh the costs. Without the law, we're losing crucial years. The risks of heat waves and heavy precipitation are increasing." Knutti has expected harsh criticism from the SVP. "When people no longer have arguments, they shoot at people." From the chimney sweep association to the Slow Food Association, everyone should be able to position themselves on the CO2 law. "But we who spend our lives studying the subject – should we be silent? That doesn't make any sense." But the question of where and how scientists position themselves remains delicate. The University of Bern has recently called on its staff to hold back on social networks. Facts must be clearly separated from opinion, the general secretary of the university stated in the "Bund". Some scientists believed in a April joke. But the university meant it. One who closely follows the controversy is Caspar Hirschi, historian at the University of St. Gallen. He comments on the difficult relationship between science and politics on all channels. He has closely followed the appearance of climate scientists in policy issues. Climate experts "could have merged the roles of the intellectual and the expert into that of the dedicated expert," wrote the historian recently in the "NZZ on Sunday". The «engaged expert» no longer answers substantive questions, but intervenes on his own initiative. "The boundary between expertise and activism is disintegrating." Not «the» science Hirschi soberly regards the yes-parole of scientists: «I consider that researchers are involved in political debates and clearly take a position, even desirable.» The prerequisite is that different positions are respected as politically legitimate. And that one does not cite «no arguments of a practical nature», with which the willingness to discuss would be abandoned. Science has repeatedly engaged in voting campaigns. When the SVP brought the enforcement initiative to the urn, over a hundred legal professors warned against a yes. Hirschi says: "I would only demand more restraint in appeals from universities in the name of ‘science'." Science is not a person. It is "limited to Hybris, when researchers, however renowned, claim to speak as a whole in the name of science". Climate researcher Reto Knutti has launched the appeal for the CO2 Act, and over a hundred leading scientists have signed it.