Opinion and debate TRIBÜNE Nuclear power is sustainable and environmentally friendly Guest commentary by Simon Aegerter Without energy, we would still be sitting in front of damp caves and eating raw meat. Energy is the basis of all progress. For hundreds of thousands of years firewood was the only source of energy. 250 years ago fossil fuels were added: coal, oil and gas. We owe them everything we have today: prosperity, quality of life, health. But now their era is coming to an end. You give us an insoluble waste problem: your use produces CO2, which disturbs the heat balance of the earth. We need to replace them with clean electricity. But where is this supposed to come from? Recently, an internal report from the European Commission's Joint Research Centre (JRC) has found that nuclear power is not only clean but also sustainable. A daring thesis? In the context of sustainable investment, the JRC's expert group has examined whether nuclear energy can cause any significant damage. The answer is no. Have the Commission experts not learned lessons from Fukushima and previous nuclear power plant disasters? However, they have even examined these cases in a particularly meticulous way in all possible aspects. They hold on: Despite a triple GAU, no one has been harmed by radiation. The experts also investigated the alleged unsolved problem of nuclear waste. Deep storage shall be such that a human being must never be exposed to an additional radiation exposure of 0.1 mSv or more. This limit is already being met: high-level radioactive waste stored in Scandinavian granite could affect a person in 20 000 to 50 000 years at a maximum of 0.01 mSv. In Switzerland's Opalinus Clay, the waste would be even more secure. So the problem of nuclear waste is not really one. ==References====External links== These findings are also relevant to us on the revised CO2 Act on June. Is the replacement of fossil fuels from renewable energy? On a normal evening in mid-April, the sun in Germany contributes 0 percent and the wind 3 percent to the power supply. A few more percent come from hydropower. The rest comes from energy sources, which are rightly to be avoided: coal and gas. How's that gonna work? How do we replace the fossil energy that destroys our environment and changes the climate? If nuclear energy had not been misled for decades, the answer would be simple: by building nuclear power plants! For this, however, it would be necessary to have the Swiss once again voted on the phase-out of nuclear energy – and to inform them thoroughly. The JRC's report comes at the right time. Nuclear energy is sustainable. Nuclear energy produces electricity day and night, regardless of the weather. And above all, nuclear energy does not produce CO2 in the plant. Why are we banning this ideal source of energy ourselves? Simon Aegerter is a physicist and has been head of Technorama in Winterthur for many years; he is the author of "The Growth of Borders. About the inexhaustible inventiveness of humans» (NZZ Libro). Nuclear energy produces electricity around the clock and regardless of the weather – without emitting CO2 during operation.