Only the low-hanging fruits harvested architect Niklaus Haller sees on the way to net zero even more expensive measures coming to the canton of Zurich Reto Flury The NZZ wrote of a «recall for climate protection». The SRF sent a "Tagesschau" contribution and reported that science is making "mobile for the energy transition", while the "view" was particularly dangerous: "For the sake of the climate: ETH professors want to ban oil heating for us." The reason for these headlines in the media in August 2015 was a political advance, which was presented at the time at the Zurich City Hall: the individual initiative for a reduction of emissions, in short: Redem Initiative. The special thing about this was that it was supported by more than forty scientists from ETH Zurich and other universities and that they thereby directly interfered with the environmental policy of the canton of Zurich. Their goal: In the medium term, new oil and gas heating systems should no longer be installed so that the self-imposed CO2 targets – at that time still 2 tonnes per capita in 2050 – can be achieved. The initiative thus went in a similar direction to the Energy Act, whose consultation has just been completed. Involvement of science? The Redem advance was created in the context of the ETH Chair of Building Technology by Hansjörg Leibundgut – a few months before the Paris Agreement and long before the first climate strikes. One was simply dissatisfied with the pace that had been hit by the conversion of Zurich's building park to lower-emission technologies, remembers the architect and first-signator Niklaus Haller, who had completed his dissertation shortly before the launch of the chair. The canton of Zurich, which was once the leader in environmental policy with its air regulations or the development of the Minergie standard, lagged behind. More importantly, however, it had been understood that the mere existence of alternative technologies would not be sufficient for transformation, but that it also needed the right framework conditions. Although for years there have been the model regulations of the cantons (Muken), which are intended to improve the energy efficiency of the buildings and have also been revised repeatedly with the cooperation of the construction directorate. But they are insufficient for Haller. First, for decades, they would have focused primarily on reducing energy demand and thus focusing primarily on the renovation of the building envelope. Secondly, they would be tightened up every few years in a lengthy process if it was found that the emission targets would not be met. Against this background, the idea of the initiative arose: the permissible emission levels should be gradually reduced, so that oil and gas would have effectively been eliminated as energy sources from the mid- 2030s. "We wanted to set long-term framework conditions so that the real estate industry and industry can adapt to this," says Haller. Unlike perhaps in transport, no groundbreaking innovations can be expected in building technology in the coming years. "The necessary technologies are available, what it needs is the implementation." In order to give the push more weight, Haller went to the Swiss science community on a signature collection. Not every one of them gave his place. Haller reports that some professors have held back on the grounds that it is not the responsibility of science to interfere directly with politics. Even then, before the climate discussion and the pandemic, he was of a different opinion. "We wanted to tell society that if these are the goals that it rightly sets itself, these steps are necessary to achieve them." Thus, he was able to secure the support of scientists such as Thomas Stocker, Anton Gunzinger and the Rector Sarah Springman. After a first blush, however, it became silent about the Redem initiative. A few months after the launch, the cantonal council has provisionally supported them with the votes of left-green factions. But when the struggle for the energy law was hard on the ground, it was above all the FDP who was working for the idea of an absink path, as Haller demanded. The reasons were, as free-minded representatives pointed out, the compatibility with the national CO2 law, which contains a path, as well as the technology neutrality: Theoretically, the initiative would have allowed to use an oil heating system and to immediately separate the emitted CO2 with climeworks apparatuses, for example. Valuable reversal of the burden of proof But the green construction director Martin Neukom and the climate alliance – the cantonal councils from the AL to the green liberals – favored another way that is now shaping the energy law: the carrot and whip model, as Basel has already introduced. In Zurich, this means that the state supports the purchase and installation of emission-free heaters such as heat pumps with a lot of money. Conversely, homeowners can only rely on oil or gas if they can demonstrate that an environmentally friendly alternative is technically impossible and more than five percent more expensive over the entire life cycle. This reversal of the burden of proof is actually the most valuable thing about this solution, Haller finds. They force real estate owners to deal with costs and technologies. Lack of knowledge is the most common reason why the majority of them still replace oil or gas heating one to one, says the architect, who is now the managing director of the company BS2, which was founded by his doctoral father Hansjörg Leibundgut. Idea taken from Basel Another advantage of the law is its resemblance to that in Basel, says Haller. That helps his business. "Building contractors, industry and planners like me are interested in the fact that they do not have to rethink each canton." He also considers that the required photovoltaic systems for new buildings do not have to be built on their roof alone, but that neighbouring buildings can be combined into one network. However, Haller considers the regulations on gas heaters, such as the purchase of certificates abroad, to be "diluted". Originally, a much higher hurdle was planned. Now it is likely to become increasingly difficult politically to get out of this long-term infrastructure, which is often in public ownership. In the new Zurich Energy Law Haller recognizes a balanced compromise, which is characterized by political pragmatism. On the other hand, it also means for him: "We only get 'low-hanging fruit'." The more expensive measures on the way to net zero would then have to decide once again for future generations. The Cantonal Council adopted the Energy Act on Monday in the final vote with a clear increase, after it had added further clarifications and additions to be negotiated between the FDP and the Climate Alliance at the end of March. Parliament had already approved its ruling on the Redem initiative in February. It was rejected by 143 votes to 0, with 19 abstentions.