Leutenegger vs. the others: The CO2 Act splits the Zurich City Council The head of the school shudder and advertises a no – the president and the other members of the executive counter Florian Schoop The explosion has brought everything a message that is attributable to the amateur area in terms of design. A red flash, numerous fonts – and an old portrait of a politician who was unlovingly copied into the overall picture. But it's not this refreshingly lay-like design of the ad that caused a whirlwind. These are the statements of the photographed politician: "Filippo Leutenegger votes no to the CO2 law", says white on red. The Zurich FDP city council and school principal talked about themselves with this statement a few days ago, which was in advertising form in newspapers and social networks. Not only did this cause resentment to his party, which is making itself strong for the aforementioned law before the vote next Sunday – but also apparently to his colleagues in the city government. Opponents switched While executive politicians usually withdraw on voting issues, after Leutenegger's oscillations, his eight colleagues from the Zurich City Council also held their backs. On Tuesday, they published a counter-indication – and pleaded for a "yes" to the CO2 Act. One could always demand an even better proposal, says the Green Daniel Leupi via Twitter. But this law represents a first step in climate protection. "Others have to follow." Interesting detail: Mentenegger's party colleague Michael Baumer was also involved in the Ja poster campaign. He explained to the Tamedia newspapers: Various opinions were part of a lively discussion. "The climate in the city council tolerates such debates." Meanwhile, city president Corine Mauch made it clear in the same article that the committee had not adopted an official slogan for the CO2 law. The eight members of the city council had placed the advertisement as a private person – and thus financed it privately. This is confirmed by the City Chancellery on request. The status of executives is not mentioned in the advertisement. Nevertheless, one speaker points out: "If the city is particularly affected by higher-level proposals, it occasionally takes its position on them." Voting recommendations of the panel in the form of a media release would only be published if unanimity were observed – for example, in the 2016 enforcement initiative. "Increasing heat" The city president herself has not for the first time been a female executive politician for the presentation. In the last week's issue of the "Tagblatt der Stadt Zürich", she took the floor for the CO2 Act. In a column in which the city councils alternately express themselves on various political issues, Mauch wrote: Cities in particular are particularly affected by climate change and its consequences – "for example by increasing heat". Perhaps that is why they are pioneers in climate policy. The voting population in Zurich already said yes to the 2000 Watt society 13 years ago and thus "an ambitious climate protection goal is anchored in the community order". The CO2 Act is an important prerequisite for achieving not only the federal climate goals, but also those of Zurich. The proposal was fair and effective; it also meant a great opportunity for innovative companies and the economy. That is why it needs "a convincing yes – for the environment, people and the economy". This is precisely the point that Filippo Mentenegger disagrees with. He recently described the proposal in the NZZ as a disadvised compromise, a dirigist intervention that would result in more taxes. The law inhibits innovation instead of supporting it, and it brings a lot of bureaucracy. Swap in the "Tagblatt" It is not the first time that Mauch and Leutenegger are arguing in public. And it is not the first time that they do this about the city council column in the "Tagblatt". At the beginning of 2018, in the middle of the election campaign around the City Bureau, the FDP politician explained what he would do better than Mauch as the top of Zurich. «Dear Corine», he titled his letter mutated to the public letter. « Tax reduction? Yes, I want one – you don't.» Even after Leutenegger's failed presidential candidate and his transfer of sentence after the elections from the civil engineering to the debt department, public debate took place. In announcing the distribution of offices, he indirectly criticized the city president sharply. The whole thing had happened against his will, «I was taken away from the department». His trust in the panel had suffered greatly. It is questionable whether the latest public disagreement on the CO2 law harms the body. Whether it was the last one, so was it. Not one opinion: Filippo Leutenegger and Corine Mauch. Annick Ramp / NZZ