ETH climate researcher Reto Knutti describes statements of US climate protection commissioner John Kerry as misleading John Kerry says that there is no need to renounce quality of life in order to combat climate change: Unexisting technologies could solve a large part of the problem. Scientists contradict and show another way. Lorenz Honegger Switzerland took a long time to get rid of oil heaters, although alternative technologies already existed. For this reason, ETH researcher Reto Knutti does not expect new technologies to make a substantial contribution to combating climate change within a short period of time. Image agency Muehlanger / Imago Actually, American climate protection officer John Kerry is currently on friendly territory: In preparation for a Uno conference, the 77-year-old travels from Rome to Berlin via London. After four years of confrontation under the Trump administration, Americans and Europeans speak the same language again in climate policy. This is why Kerry's statements in a BBC interview of the weekend are rather unexpected, causing a bit of criticism from renowned environmental scientists. In the discussion, the former Foreign Minister had taken the view that for a large part of the greenhouse gas reduction targets in the Paris climate change agreement, there was no need to renounce quality of life. "Scientists, not politicians, tell me that 50 percent of the reduction will take place through technologies that do not exist today." John Kerry, the US government's climate protection officer, is critical of the unexpected side of his journey to Europe. Daniel Pockett / Getty Now it is important to advance the corresponding efforts as quickly as possible. "We have developed vaccines, flew to the moon and invented the Internet. We know what we need to do to help inventions and innovations succeed." He would not join the pessimists who labeled the belief in future innovations as "waiting for any new technology," said Kerry. «The problem is the lack of political will» The critical reactions to Kerry's statements were not long in coming. Julian Allwood, professor at Cambridge University, told the BBC that "it is practically impossible that new technologies in the field of energy infrastructure will have a significant effect on global emissions in the remaining time". So far, it has taken 30 to 100 years from the invention of a new technology to a five-percent penetration of the markets. At the request of the NZZ, the climate researcher Reto Knutti from ETH Zurich also says that it is misleading to suggest that completely new technologies that are not yet existing could play an important role in combating climate change by 2050. "The main problem is not that we have too few technologies today: the problem is the lack of political will to help these technologies break through." As an example of this problem, Knutti mentions the fact that until recently every second oil heating in Switzerland has been replaced by a new oil heating system, although non-fossil heating technologies have existed for over 30 years. The example of Norway shows where Switzerland must move, where 70 percent of newly registered vehicles are now electrically operated. "The Norwegians are technologically no longer than we are, but they have set the framework conditions in such a way that electromobility can reach a critical size." ETH climate researcher Reto Knutti considers John Kerry's statements to be delicate. Christian Beutler / Keystone Of course there are also promising technologies such as those of the Swiss company Climeworks, which filtered CO2 out of the ambient air. But until these technologies could make a substantial contribution to the fight against climate change, enormous investments were needed: the amount of CO2 filtered out by Climeworks currently corresponds to "a fraction of a promille". The same applies to climate-neutral synthetic fuel produced from CO2 and water. In the case of photovoltaic technology too, enormous investments were needed until it became competitive. "There are economies of scale, but that takes time and money." Knutti emphasizes: "Avoidance does not have to be a waiver. When I switch from an oil heater to a heat pump or from a petrol engine to an electric car, I do not want anything."New technologies are also the focus of the vote on the CO2 law The debate about the contribution of new or not yet established technologies to combating climate change also plays a role in the ongoing vote on the Swiss CO2 law, which will be held on 13 March. The vote will take place at the next voting time. The SVP, for example, rejects the law and wants to focus on the expansion of green hydrogen technology. Critics, however, consider the technology to be not efficient enough to make a significant contribution to the fight against climate change.