opinion COMMENTAR - Of bonts and parasites In social networks, messages are becoming easier and more aggressive. That's dangerous enough. That is why politicians should strive for decency. Christina Neuhaus Indecent words are also sent out into the world with fast fingers. Jenny Kane / AP Recently a message appeared on Twitter that irritated. This is nothing new on the short news service, which is increasingly becoming an insulting portal. But this tweet was noticeable. Sender was "Fck off CO2 law". The content was: "The Yes Committee CO2 Act is full of bonts. These are among the causes of the climate crisis. And why are these now in the Yes Committee? Because the CO2 law is a lazy compromise in the sense of the capitalists. The bonts continue to want to rip millions off at the expense of our environment." The subtle message also circulated on Facebook. Soon it was divided a hundred times and given a heart of approval. Behind the sender, readers should probably suspect a conglomerate of «Extinction Rebellion» and Young Socialists on Speed. But the deception came up. A member of the management of the Swiss juso researched and finally revealed that the campaign came from the fear kitchen of the advertiser Alexander Segert. Segert, owner of the Goal Office, which specializes in right-wing populist advertising, stated that he had acted "on behalf of a member/supporter of the climate movement". He left open the climate movement he was dealing with. Segert von der Goal AG has also admitted the whole of Inwzische: https://t.co/H4OJTnwcdc— Sandro Covo (@sacovo) May 14, 2021 If the campaign was intended to catch votes in red-green wilds, it missed its goal. Many noticed how clumsy the text tried to imitate gender-appropriate language: those who change with asterisks can save themselves the Inner I. The aggressive nature of the message clearly disturbed the left, imitated by Segert. Shortly after the revelation of her comrade, the Juso Baselland proudly published a tweet for which the office would probably have paid good money. Above the counterfeit of Juso President Ronja Jansen («We can no longer afford the richest») was said: «The question is not whether we can, but whether we want to. For an ÖV for everyone instead of for super-rich parasites." The indignation was great. Parasite is a term from the "Dictionary of the Inhuman". The Nazis used it for dehumanization. Adolf Hitler wrote in «Mein Kampf»: «The Jew is and remains the typical parasite, a parasite that spreads more and more like a harmful bacillus, as well as only a favorable breeding ground for it.» To save the honour of Juso Baselland, it should be said that they immediately deleted the tweet when they were made aware of the terrible historical background of the word. The message now is: "The question is not what we can afford, but what we want. For an ÖV for everyone instead of for super-rich Abzocker*innen." This is still baggy, but at least skillfully opposed. The question is not what we can afford, but what we want. For an ÖV for all instead of super-rich Abzocker*innen.https://t.co/Z1P8piGCUu— JUSO Baselland (@jusobl) May 14, 2021 The SVP was the first party to use roughnesses such as red and green felt lice specifically for political messages. The Juso soon became their most zealous students. The recipe to simplify statements and repeat them over and over again is successful, but also dangerous. On social media portals, the sound has recently become more intense: it is insulted and hurt, which keeps the stuff. The messages are getting easier and easier. The fading increases daily. It's hard to stand up to private individuals like this. It is intolerable with representatives of political parties. The German political scientist Gerhard Lehmbruch defined politics in the following ways: It is social action, "which is aimed at regulating social conflicts over values bindingly". Anyone who equates people from political calculations with parasites, bonts or felt lice does not regulate conflicts. He stirs them up.