"The claim that gasoline is increased by 12 cents is a gross misinformation of the opponents of the CO2 law" FDP Group President Beat Walti says that one can be liberal and still agree with the new CO2 law. He contradicts internal critics such as Christian Wasserfallen and Filippo Leutenegger. And he says what bothers him personally about the template. Christof Forster, Bern FDP Group President Beat Walti says: "You can't wash the fur without getting wet". Peter Klaunzer / KEYSTONE Mr. Walti, free-minded exponents such as the Zurich City Council and former National Councillor Filippo Leutenegger see the FDP leadership in the CO2 law on the wrong side. How can you, as a liberal, support the proposal? The revised law continues to implement widely proven instruments such as CO2 emissions on fuels. They are based, to the very greatest extent, on steering and not on prohibitions. Businesses and households can continue to free up their decisions on consumption and investment, but they have to bear the costs due to the causes. Leutenegger criticises the law leading to additional taxes. In the case of the charge on fuels, two thirds are reimbursed via the health insurance premiums. That's a decent quota. With the new air ticket tax, it's half. One must not forget something: there is also an indirect redistribution. Meaning? Everyone benefits from the funds that flow from the fund to reduce CO2 emissions. This brings Switzerland closer to the CO2 target. As a result, the steering instruments need to be less sharply designed. This indirect effect is very difficult to quantify. But it's like this: you can't wash the fur without getting wet. The levies will be felt by some. That's the idea of steering. It is crucial that one can influence or even avoid the consequences by one's own behavior. But there are people, for example in peripheral regions, who depend on the car. It is a gross misinformation of the opponents who claim that the gasoline is increased by 12 raps. This decision is not taken by policymakers, but by oil importers who do not want to increase their product unnecessarily. They will try to achieve their compensation target with 'favourable' measures, which they can finance with the lowest possible surcharges on fuels. Today, this impact is only 1.5 rappen. Maybe five raps. It is very unlikely that the surcharge will rise to 12 rappings with the new law. Another criticism of the law is that it brings about dirigistic interventions. What do you say? That's not true. You can keep driving or flying as much as you want. With the exception of the specifications for fossil heating systems, there are no additional dirigistic interventions in the law. According to polls, the FDP base is divided in the CO2 Act. Why? This has to do with the no campaign that carries false statements. It is also true that the proposal does not only correspond to our wish programme, but is a compromise that has been negotiated with difficulty. In the end, the question arises of how important the goal is to you. What's the most disturbing part of the law? Personally, I am most disturbed by the air ticket tax and its lack of links with innovation in aviation. I would have liked a fixed amount from the levy to have flowed into the development and production of new fuels. The new eco-course of the FDP was supported by a member survey. Now, according to surveys, half of the FDP base rejects the template. How do you explain that? It's not the same base. Our members are very determined, as the 2019 survey showed. The delegates' meeting and the cantonal parties supported the law with around 80 percent votes in favour. That's a great deal of support. In the voting polls, on the other hand, it is simply asked at the end which party you are close to. This has a certain blurry, because the electorate is less involved in the discussions than the members. ==References== June will show whether we have managed to communicate the liberal considerations to our voters.