GASTCOMENTAR - In the climate crisis, we need to talk plainly In the run-up to the referendum on the CO2 law, half-truths are being spread and facts deliberately clouded. As scientists, we cannot just accept that. Thomas Stocker Switzerland needs to do much more to halve its CO2 emissions by 2030. Dali Tanner / NZZ As a climate researcher, I have often been reproved when I publicly expressed myself about the necessary steps to avert the climate crisis. I am very surprised that even after the Paris Agreement this still happens. In Paris, after decades of negotiations, political decision-makers agreed to define clear targets for climate protection. The Paris Agreement is based on a formal assessment process of scientific findings on human-made climate change and the ongoing climate crisis. Science says what to do to achieve this socially and politically agreed goal: emissions from the combustion of coal, oil and natural gas must be reduced to net zero by 2050. In this context, climate protection is more favourable than the elimination of climate damage. As scientists, we are obliged to share this information, especially when misinformation and fogging is prior to the vote on 13 March. ==References====External links== Negation of facts "Switzerland is on the road in an exemplary way", is the key statement of Avenergy, formerly the oil association, which has taken the referendum on the CO2 law and on the front line together with the SVP, Swissoil and various car associations with flyers, advertisements and appearances in the media and on the web influences the public. And for this reason, as a website announces, we should "be sensible" and reject the present CO2 law. Such statements have nothing to do with facts, but they form part of the systematic spread of falsehoods that have lasted for decades and have consistently torpedoed climate protection so far. The fact is that Switzerland has reduced its domestic CO2 emissions by 7.3 million tonnes of CO2 between 1990 and 2018 (minus 16 percent). That's good, but 16 percent within 28 years is totally inadequate. If it were to remain at this snail's pace, we would have reduced our domestic emissions by just 33 percent by 2050 rather than zero. Another fact that drives heating and for which we are also directly responsible is completely ignored: our consumption of goods from abroad has increased CO2 emissions by more than 40 million tons (a doubling) over the same period. And it is the total emissions of CO2, both domestically and externally, which are responsible for the global climate crisis. The figures come from the latest data from the international science network Global Carbon Project. In total, Switzerland emits 41 percent more CO2 than it did in 1990. We are in no way "prefigured" on the contrary: Denmark minus 17 percent, Sweden minus 17 percent in the same period, to name just two of Europe's leading countries in climate protection. Despite its excellent starting position (money, technology and heads) in climate protection, Switzerland has long since been overtaken and is now on the rearmost ranks. Should we seriously remain "reasonable"? The long journey to Paris It is well known that interest groups in the political process are little or no obligation to the facts. The knowledge would be available, as a look into the past shows: The American Petroleum Institute wrote back in 1968 that the rise of CO2 in the atmosphere was caused by the combustion of coal and oil and that this could lead to an increase in temperatures, the melting of ice caps and a rise in sea level. A scientist from the research department of Exxon Mobile wrote in 1978: "According to the current state of knowledge, we have 5 to 10 years before hard decisions about changes in energy strategy become critical." In the same year, my predecessors at the University of Bern, Uli Siegenthaler and Hans Oeschger, published detailed calculations of the man-made CO2 increase in the atmosphere and the distribution of these emissions in the biosphere and the ocean in the science magazine "Science". They noted that "a maximum permitted limit for CO2 would be found, which should not be exceeded if the atmospheric radiation balance (i.e. the temperature of the earth's surface) should not be disturbed in a dangerous way". 16 years later, the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change comes into force, which in its Article 2 requires that "a dangerous human-made effect on the climate system" must be prevented. After another 21 years, all countries agree on the "maximum permitted limit": The historic Paris Agreement states that the warming should be kept well below 2 degrees Celsius compared to pre-industrial times. It obliges countries to take steps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to set and implement new, tougher targets every five years. The work of thousands of scientists within the framework of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has laid the robust foundation for Paris. Without communicating scientific knowledge about the climate and the dangerous effects, if the Paris climate targets are missed, we would be exposed to ignorance and half-truths of powerful interest groups. The costly and tragic consequences were demonstrated during the Corona pandemic in those countries where science was not heard or tied back. This is precisely why Swiss science continues to make clear its position on the forthcoming vote on the CO2 Act of 13 December. ==References== It is also clear that we have achieved a significant reduction in our CO2 emissions and are on track in some sectors, such as building heating or special industries. This is a positive thing, but unfortunately it is far from enough. For this reason, we need framework conditions that allow us to fulfil the commitments we have made internationally. Volunteering is not enough to be voluntary, as desirable as it is, but fails to perform such tasks. Environmental problems, both national and even more global, have never been solved by voluntary action: water pollution in Switzerland in the 1960s, sulphur and lead pollution in the air in the 1980s or ozone problems in the 1990s. Here, as in everyday life, only a few voluntarily follow traffic rules, no one pays taxes without asking. A taxpayer has never convinced a tax evasionist to pay taxes. Rules are therefore necessary evils to achieve a common goal which cannot be achieved elsewhere by the individual, but which is essential. The target is set: According to Paris, we have to reduce domestic emissions by a further 34 percent over the next nine years, so that we can achieve the promised reduction of 50 percent in 2030, i.e. almost 4 percent less emissions each year. This cannot be achieved without a legal framework and without incentives, as we have already lost a lot of time since the first international agreement on climate change, the Kyoto Protocol of 1995. The present CO2 law forms this framework, which is not entirely new, but is based on the existing CO2 law, which dates from the pre-Paris period. It is the result of a detailed political process in which majorities were wrestled and in which majorities were also found – across party borders. It is also part of our unique political culture that the parliamentary result is once again put to the final test, due to the important instrument of the referendum. ==References== June when we vote on the CO2 Act. We are voting on whether Switzerland, as one of the richest countries on the planet, is prepared to take a first step towards pragmatic and honest climate protection with innovation and a smart framework. The CO2 law sets the course, so that Switzerland does not go on the track internationally and would not only be denounced as a climate polluter, but would even miss the connection to green technology and innovation completely. We know that the climate crisis requires a much more ambitious law, a law that includes, for example, our entire carbon footprint, domestic and international emissions and also methane emissions. But we are in the classic dilemma between scientific necessity and political feasibility. In any case, the present law is an important first step. The Paris Agreement, which has ratified Switzerland, ensures that all countries assess the state of their efforts in the course of five years. This means that it is already clear today that Switzerland's CO2 law must be a dynamic one, which will undergo adjustments in the coming years after 2030. The present law takes in important stakes. It does this not with prohibitions, but with many incentives. One of the most important incentives is the Climate Fund, which is fueled by moderate CO2 emissions steering contributions. All contributions will benefit the population directly or indirectly, on the one hand, by supporting innovation in our country, in other words: the renewal of our valuable infrastructure and the creation of future jobs, on the other hand, as a direct repayment to the individual wallet. Those who are on the move with a low carbon footprint get out net; those who do not make their contribution to the reduction of CO2 also do good by enabling climate protection with their steering contribution. When new pots of money are opened, there are regular calls about the government and the effectiveness of such instruments. These are not justified. Who, if not Switzerland, should be able to manage such a fund in a targeted and transparent manner? We have experience in this, for example with the extremely popular building program for the energetic renovation of the federal government and the cantons. Every tonne of CO2 counts And at the end comes the much-tended "argument" of small Switzerland. Our share of CO2 emissions is just one per mill of the world's emissions. This is a fact, but this argument is irrelevant for climate protection, because every tonne of CO2 counts whether it is blown into the atmosphere by China or San Marino. And I am thinking: my annual contribution to the tax revenue of the canton of Bern is just 0.01 promille. Why should I pay for this? It's just a drop on the hot rock! The alternative – the rejection of the present CO2 law and the waiting for a more stringent one – will, according to experience, delay Swiss climate policy by many years. Switzerland cannot and must not afford this if it does not want to become completely unlaudable and if it wants to leave the economic opportunities resulting from climate protection to other countries. Thomas Stocker is a climate and environmental physicist at the University of Bern. From 2008 to 2015, he was co-chairman of one of the three working groups of the IPCC.