The billion-dollar pot for all cases Instead of a steering system, Parliament created a new subsidy vehicle with the climate fund – including extra sausage for pensioners Fabian Schäfer The new CO2 law looked temporarily old. The debates in Parliament were turbulent. The National Council crash was followed by a quick reboot in the Council of States, a lot of things had to go quickly – that's what you notice from the draft, which was issued on 13 March. ==References====External links== A central element leaves a not entirely mature impression: the Climate Fund – the new financing vehicle with which the Department of Environment Minister Simonetta Sommaruga is to subsidise climate change away. In the medium term, about one billion Swiss francs are expected to be distributed annually. The Federal Council had not planned such a fund, on the contrary: it wanted to get out of the state subsidy and switch to a steering system. Although it would have increased the CO2 dues on fuel oil or natural gas, the money would have been completely returned to the population and businesses. According to the motto: Those who live climate-friendly, save, and the others put on it. The fiscal rate would not have increased. This would be the path that economics suggests. The idea behind this is that it is enough to set a correct price for the emission of greenhouse gases. The rest will be done by private households and companies themselves, cheaper and with less friction than if the state tries to promote the desired behaviour. One problem is the take-away effects that arise when tax money is used to support, for example, the installation of a heat pump that the homeowners would have purchased anyway. Enticing "special casks" But Parliament wanted it different. Firstly, it has decided that the state should continue to retain around one third of the CO2 levy in order to promote climate-friendly measures. Secondly, the National and State Councils have introduced a new levy, which is to be distributed back only half. We are talking about the airline tax, which is to be paid to the Climate Fund by 49 percent. In addition to the CO2 dues, it is the fund's main source of income. The new subsidy fund was devised by environmental policy makers in the Council of State when they sought a viable solution after the disaster of the reform in the National Council. From a political point of view, the advantages of a "special passport" are obvious: the funds are secured against austerity packages. At the same time, a generously endowed fund is a strong argument to convince potential beneficiaries. If this was the goal, then the calculation was at least partially carried out: large parts of the economy support the presentation, prominently represented are companies from areas such as construction, solar energy, environmental and building technology, which can expect more orders thanks to the fund. Nevertheless, it is still controversial whether a special fund is really the right instrument. The vehicle had to be put on in the shortest possible time at the request of the leading environmental policy makers. Initially, the Council of States wanted to give the environmental department practically a carte blanche in the distribution of money. It could even have overtaxed Parliament's budget decisions. Meanwhile, the rules are more restrictive, but the governance of the climate fund within the federal budget still seems cumbersome. This is the conclusion of the recently published draft regulation on CO2 law. Thus, not all the money will flow into the fund, but a part can go directly to the relevant offices, for the increase of existing loans. However, the climate millions must not pay for anything that is already being paid, but should be additional measures. There are likely to be demarcation issues. The Federal Council could possibly use the fund's revenue to plug holes. In general, the Fund should be detrimental to transparency in the budget process. For example, if the federal government has to increase its loan for flood protection, does it now take the money from general funds or from the climate fund? The fine tuning is demanding, can be heard. The Federal Council wants to provide clarity in each case by reporting annually on the use of funds from the Fund. The federal government is supposed to protect risks The issue is not made clearer if one takes into account the wide range of uses that Parliament has devised for the climate fund: building renovations, climate-friendly heating systems, research in aviation, car charging stations, electric buses, geothermal energy, night trains, climate projects of cantons and municipalities, guarantees, and avoidance of climate-related damage. In addition, the Parliament has added a clause which enables the Federation to support unspecified "further measures" which serve the objectives of the law. The Fund is in principle subject to Parliament's budgetary sovereignty. This will determine every four years how the funds will be allocated between the various uses. The law also stipulates that the fund must make reserves and not be in debt. This is not a coincidence, because the federal government will take risks too. It can, for example, secure investments in district heating networks so that such projects do not fail due to unpredictable risks such as the disappearance of a key customer. Parliament obviously has a lot to do with the federal administration. It has also commissioned them with the CO2 Act to cover "long-term risks of investments in the climate-friendly modernisation of buildings". How this is to be done is open. According to the Federal Office for the Environment, a first approach is available, which is now being examined in more detail in the administration. Other funding purposes under the law are not implemented for the time being, as the Federal Government states, in particular, more complex instruments such as new approaches to guarantees or participation models. However, in other tasks of the Fund, the administration has done a great deal of work. For example, the controversial idea of subsidising new charging stations for e-vehicles already has a sophisticated implementation. The grants therefore benefit only owners of properties with at least three housing units. A maximum of CHF 500 per charging station should flow. Multiple funding is expressly permitted, the total contributions may amount to up to 80 percent of the investment costs. Another striking measure concerns the elderly, in particular the owners of housing among them. The opponents of the SVP warned in Parliament that retired people would be in financial bottlenecks because they could no longer afford building renovations with the new limit values. Knowing how dangerous this argument can be, the majority of the law states that the climate fund must help in such situations as well. The keyword is energy contracting. Business models in which a supplier finances, for example, the heating of a customer when it can supply it with heat in the long term are meant. The problem with this is that according to the federal government, there are hardly any attractive offers for single-family homes in this area today. The climate fund is also intended to address this shortcoming. According to the draft regulation, providers should receive CHF 1500 each if they carry out "impulse consulting" with a potential customer. 20 new full-time posts According to the draft regulation, the federal government is particularly keen to limit this support to retired people. The law does not provide for this issue to be dealt with as clearly as possible. However, the Federal Council now wants to stipulate that the 1500 francs will only be paid out if the owner has reached the proper retirement age of the AHV. Anyone who has problems with heating a few years before retirement will have to look after it – if by then Parliament has not also decided on a special solution for this special case. The sophisticated subsidy machine is highly caring. According to the federal government, almost 20 new full-time posts have to be created for implementation in the administration. As the Federal Council wrote in 2015, when it was still seriously trying to get out of the subsidy policy: "A steering system enables the climate and energy targets to be achieved from an administrative and thus from a human point of view at lower costs."