Decarbonization – the great challenge for aviation The pandemic is bringing global aviation the worst setback of all time. The pace of recovery depends on the effectiveness of vaccination operations. Just as important as safe flying in Corona times, however, is the transition to environmentally friendly offers. Werner Enz Swissair aircraft on the ground: The Airbus A321-111, HB-IOF "Winterthur", in the fog at Zurich Airport. For decades, Swissair has been observing that the increase in aviation's transport performance is keeping pace with economic growth, or even surpassing it. The wealth created made it possible for more and more people to discover the world while traveling or to visit relatives and friends in the distance. Businessmen jetted around the world to see on-site factories on the right or to visit customers. And with the drive of the innovation of aircraft construction, it has been possible over the years with great constancy to offer flights to broad populations at attractive prices. However, the outbreak of the Sars-CoV-2 pandemic has now led to such a sharp drop in traffic figures that doubts are raised as to whether the return to normality will still be possible. According to the statistics of the International Civil Aviation Organisation (Icao), passenger volume fell by 74% on international routes in 2020 and by 50% on domestic markets. Only 1.8 billion left. People got on a plane. ==References====External links==* Official website Passengers were counted, with 60% painfully out. How much longer does this pandemic keep people in fear and terror? How effective will the vaccines be? It's unusual times: Tokyo wants to play Olympic games this summer, but for health reasons it doesn't welcome foreigners in the country with a few exceptions. What the Swissair broke its neck A flashback to past crises and disasters that aviation also struggled with may provide guidance to assess the long-term impact of the pandemic. At the beginning of the nineties, the second Gulf War created an uncomfortable environment, which dampened the desire for travel during two or three years. The demand for the terrorist attacks on America on 11 November was much more severe. ==References====External links==* Official website Traffic volumes in the US market decreased by 12% in 2001, and in the fourth quarter there had even been a 20% drop in demand. An analogy to the Corona pandemic is that the government ordered a temporary closure of the aircraft fleets at that time and quickly came to the aid of the affected airlines. At that time, grants of 5 billion were granted. $ and twice as much in collateralized loans. The U.S. government had to take over as a guarantor overnight, after insurance companies had revoked their cover with explicit reference to a terrorist clause in the contracts. It is well known that two aircraft had been driven into the cockpit by storming terrorists into the twin towers of the World Trade Center and another aircraft into the Pentagon building. Without insurance cover, no passenger jet can still start today, because in the event of a crash, this could mean the exit for an airline. American airlines were even held harmless for higher insurance premiums after 9/11. The Swissair finally broke its neck in 9/11, because after the disaster in New York, the over-indebted airline was no longer able to secure the necessary money for its survival in time with the sale of subsidiaries such as Swissport or the Nuance's duty-free shops. The treacherously implemented Hunter strategy, which began with the purchase of Sabena in the mid-nineties and ended abruptly in January 2001 with the ejection of Philippe Bruggisser, had led to destruction. The grounding of the Swissair fleet was completed on 2 July 1899. October 2001 – the Swiss gathered for a rescue operation. Although the sinking of Swissair decided on a proud chapter in Helvetic aviation history, it was possible to sell Swiss following Swissair after a necessary re-dimension of Lufthansa in 2005. Alessandro della Valle / Keystone Walter Bieri / Keystone Thousands of Swissair employees protest with big marches in Bahnhofstrasse and on Balsberg in front of the airline's headquarters. The whistles are directed against the two major banks UBS and Credit Suisse. Alessandro della Valle / Keystone Walter Bieri / Keystone You don't want to imagine how a Swiss, perhaps led by the Swiss Confederation, would have survived the next major crisis, namely the 2008/09 banking crisis. The banking crisis triggered a recession in several countries, which in turn caused aviation. The integration of Swiss into the Lufthansa Group helped a lot, and after a short-term diver of global aviation, it went up quite steeply from 2010. Neither 9/11, nor the outbreak of a 2002 Sars epidemic in South China and Hong Kong, nor the banking crisis, nor the Mers virus, which first appeared in Saudi Arabia in 2012, caused sustained damage. The trust of the customers had returned comparatively quickly each time. Hope for the summer months Will confidence return this time again after the end of the Sars-CoV-2 pandemic? Much depends on whether vaccination operations will have their positive effects worldwide in the coming months. The hope is growing that a digital vaccination passport developed at the initiative of the Iata industry association, individual airlines and the Icao will be rapidly disseminated. The EU's Digital Green Pass also promises progress. Close coordination with the World Health Organization (WHO) and national health authorities is still needed. Without their intervention for mutual recognition of vaccination passports, airlines remain bound by their hands, especially in the case of long-haul flights. Several airlines have already carried out test flights to show that vaccinated passengers equipped with the necessary travel documents can return freely in compliance with current Corona regulations. Or if you fly from New York to Malpensa/Milan with Delta, you should get around the quarantine thanks to three negative tests – one PCR test each and one fast antigen test before departure and another antigen test after arrival. The procedure with the Corona tests sounds cumbersome, but also shows the growing willingness of airlines and their customers to take on a lot of bureaucracy in order to finally be able to fly again. Singapore Airlines will systematically use the Iata Travel Pass from the beginning of May; Asian airlines in particular are relying on this travel document to get the business back on track. Many damages are not yet visible There is no doubt that many airlines have survived 2020 only thanks to state financial aid. The Iata branch association is proud to receive the sum of 225 billion. In the United States and Japan, however, there were no more than 400 billion in revenue outflows. $ and an added loss of about 125 billion. $ is to be seen. According to the Icao figures, the airlines had an international revenue shortfall of 250 billion. $, whereas domestic business – ahead of it thanks to a rapid recovery in China and partly in America – with a decline of 120 billion. China was the first country to outstrip the US with 398 million dollars in the pandemic year. against 358 million Passengers. According to the Icao calculations, airports paid around 110 billion. $ in revenue. It is more difficult to see how violently the many suppliers of airlines have been hit by the pandemic. And despite all this, there were also some bright spots: air freight fell by only 8% in volume last year, with profitability improving significantly due to the capacity shortages and the strongly increasing freight rates in response to this. Christoph Ruckstuhl / NZZ Zurich Airport is closed after the lockdown aircraft, and the escalators are also out of service. Christoph Ruckstuhl / NZZ Now the airline managers hope to be able to take advantage of a revival of travel business even more than 2020 this summer. This is likely to give the chance to refuel the power of low-cost airlines such as Easy Jet, Ryanair, Wizz Air and Lufthansa's subsidiary Eurowings in advance when it comes to the European market. However, there are already setbacks and a lot of uncertainty, because holiday destinations like Mexico or Egypt are suddenly called risk countries again and returnees have to be quarantined. In addition, many put a big question mark when it comes to the medium to long-term perspectives for business travel. Connectivity, especially the number of direct connections, has already been seriously damaged by the pandemic. The Iata Director General Alexandre de Juniac resigned at the end of March, calling it a disaster that of 30,000 city pairs, i.e. the direct flights between major cities, the 18 000 of which have disappeared. This has led to a reduction in aviation to a level that had been achieved in 1998. One side effect of the pandemic is that consolidation in the industry, which is still highly fragmented with the exception of the US, has almost come to a halt. Except for some corporate bankruptcies such as Avianca in South America, Virgin Australia or Compass Airlines in the USA or Norwegian Air in Europe, not much has happened at first glance. Previously, successful airlines such as Lufthansa, Singapore Airlines, International Airlines Group (British Airways and Iberia) or Qatar Airways have enough to do to ensure their own survival. And before it can be bought, the Corona state loans must usually be repaid. This is also true of Lufthansa and Swiss, who have to face losses after a weak start to the new year, as well as many competitors. The environmental balance needs to be improved One of the most uncomfortable starting points is the need for lower passenger numbers due to the pandemic for at least two years, especially on long-haul routes. This forces us to question in principle the network that has grown over the years. And the focus is increasingly on how to make flying more environmentally friendly. The goals announced by the Iata to reduce CO2 emissions by 50% by 2050 compared to 2005 and to advance with the global Corsia (Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation) programme seem somewhat non-binding. To compensate for CO2 emissions by ultimately paying the customer an extra charge is no more than a temporary transitional solution to improve the damage balance. In 2019, commercial aviation generated a CO2 emission of approximately 920 million tonnes. t, including pollutants such as nitrogen oxide, soot particles, particulate matter and sulphur oxide. This represented slightly more than 2.5% of the global CO2 emissions. In the midst of pandemic times, the individual airlines are therefore under pressure to invest more money in new aircraft and renewable fuels. The use of biofuels, which are derived from used vegetable and edible oils, has been tried and tested many times and at least as an admixture to kerosene offers no technical problems. Compared to fossil kerosene, the three times as expensive fuels are only available in very limited quantities. A Lufthansa A321 is fuelled for a test flight with biofuels and kerosene in a 1:1 ratio. Jörg Böthling / Imago In any case, airlines have to prepare themselves for environmental policy requirements to be formulated harder and CO2 emissions dues to be more expensive. In France, the ban on short-haul flights is being seriously considered. And Switzerland, with its planned CO2 law, is facing the imposition of ticket charges between 30 and a maximum of 120 Fr. for short- and long-haul flights, doubting whether the money collected is being used properly. Only about half of the new tax revenues of several hundred million Swiss francs a year will be refunded directly to the population; the rest will be donated to a climate fund, which opens the door to particular interests, but hardly guarantees technological breakthroughs from Helvetic research laboratories. A great potential for improving the climate balance is assumed in the production of synthetic fuels. Aircraft manufacturers and manufacturers of engines have long been at work to develop new concepts for this in the age of decarbonisation. Electric drives, fuel cells and hydrogen technology are three keywords. The Airbus Group, which was able to deliver only 566 aircraft (–35%) in the pandemic year, is also in competition with Boeing in these areas. Airbus Group CEO Guillaume Faury is looking forward to completing test flights with a hydrogen-powered Nurflügler in 2027; in the "Flug of the Future", wings and fuselage form a compact aerodynamic body. Faury recently said on an occasion by the Eurocontrol Air Traffic Control Agency that large-volume hydrogen tanks would force engineers to design the aircraft from the ground up. I hope so. Commercial aviation will recover from the pandemic sooner or later. The "Blended Wing" study is the optimal variant for the installation of hydrogen tanks. Visualisation Airbus Why should the aviatics engineers not succeed in building more environmentally friendly means of transport, as should the car manufacturers? All the desires, dreams or even constraints that people have let fly out into the wide world cannot have suddenly vanished into thin air. The great economic importance of aviation is also undisputed: this has shown not least the timely supply of medicines, respirators and hygiene products as well as the repatriation of fellow citizens after the outbreak of the pandemic.