Do the farmers give their blessing to the CO2 law? The board of the Farmers' Association is promoting a yes – the Farmers' Party, on the other hand, is pushing for a parole waiver Angelika Hardegger The letters from the readers are written, the posters printed, the arguments are listed. The campaign for the new climate policy is running smoothly, only one question is still open – one of the weights: do the farmers give their blessing? ==References====External links== ==References====External links== The peasant participation will be record-breaking. That Sunday, two pesticide initiatives are coming to the urn. Farmers are fighting them with everything they have – also with the reference to how much they already do in the environment. This brings the opinion of the farmers to the third submission, to climate policy. Because whether this climate policy really needs it? Agriculture is divided. The board of the Swiss Farmers' Association finds: Yes. This is not the view of the Peasant Party SVP. On Tuesday the showdown will take place in the Chamber of Agriculture, the Parliament of Farmers. Tracked starting position The output is uncertain. Much plays a part in the decision: the memory of the withered meadows from the heat summer 2018. The peasant resentment against the environmental associations that promote climate policy. And the strategic question: what signal does agriculture, accused of environmental issues, send if it refuses to approve the CO2 compromise? The industry is in a messy situation. Markus Ritter, the president of the Swiss peasants, fights for two basic military principles: never wage war on two fronts. And: Prevent any division of your army. The slogan of the CO2 law comes to him twice inconvenient. Ritter has been supporting the CO2 law ever since. But the SVP is influential in the Farmers' Association. You want to avoid an internal dispute about the climate in the middle of the pesticide fight. The SVP sees the way out of the slogan. National Councillor Erich von Siebenthal says: "We must fight agricultural initiatives with all our weight. Therefore, the farmers' association should refrain from a slogan for the CO2 law." Von Siebenthal is a mining company. He voted in favour of the CO2 law in Parliament, against the party's will. No other SVP farmer has exposed himself to the climate as he did. The fact that even von Siebenthal pleads for caution underlines how delicate the slogan is for the farmers. The CO2 Act will determine Switzerland's climate policy by 2030. Flying, gasoline and heating with oil are thus more expensive. For the first time, the Federal Council also formulates a concrete goal for agriculture. It is expected to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20 percent by 2030, compared to 1990. The diesel will be more expensive How this goal is to be achieved needs to be clarified by agricultural reform. For the time being, farmers are affected as private individuals: they have to pay more for diesel, gasoline and fuel oil, just like all Swiss people. The fuel will cost up to 12 centimetres per litre. That's what hit the car-riding country. SVP farmer Erich von Siebenthal says: "If you look closely, the CO2 law will cost farmers in the back of Meiringen and in the back of Lauenen more than the average Swiss." The question is: What does the farmers cost more? The CO2 Act – or the consequences if you don't do anything? Climate experts warn of drought, extreme weather or new pests. Erich von Siebenthal says: "The CO2 law costs. But we farmers will pay for global warming in any case. When meadows and fields wither, nothing is won at all." The bottom line is that climate policy is more favourable. Many farmers disagree with the SVP. Martin Haab is the National Councillor and President of the Zurich Farmers' Association. He says, "I don't want to scavenge climate change. But agriculture can also benefit."The warmer climate prolongs the growing season. The grass is ripe in the past, soy or millet can grow, perhaps even peaches. Haab says: "We must deal with new cultures and varieties in any case. This will not change the CO2 law." Haab wants the farmers' association to dispense with a CO2 parole: "Our focus must be 100 percent on the agricultural initiatives." But even the bankers' association has taken a slogan about the CO2 law. How could agriculture, the first and the most important affected of climate change, stand aside? Albert Rösti, the former president of the SVP, even advocates a rural no to the CO2 Act. Agriculture will "come under massive pressure" if it does not counteract climate policy, he warns in the "Swiss farmer". Rösti is president of the Swissoil heating oil lobby and as such is caught. But his concerns are being heard. The problem with the cows tractors and machines make up the smallest part of greenhouse gases on farms. The elephant in the room is the cows. They form methane and nitrous oxides during rumining. Both gases are much more climate-damaging than CO2. The fear is that the new climate policy will make the call for fewer cattle louder. The large environmental associations have long denounced that there were too many farm animals in the country. ==References====External links== On June 20, the Commission adopted a proposal for a directive on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to asbestos. The peasant resentment against WWF, Pro Natura or Greenpeace is growing. That could be a part of the day of the slogan. Agriculture is also aware that it can benefit from the CO2 Act. Many farmers own forest. Wood heating, district heating and wooden buildings are supported by the CO2 Act. The charges on airbillette and CO2 will feed a climate fund that will reduce biogas plants. Already today some farmers earn good money as electricity producers. They have large roofs for photovoltaics. The SVP National Councillor Alois Huber says: "Young, innovative farmers see these opportunities." Huber builds in the Aargau and is on the board of the Swiss Farmers' Association. He says: "Agriculture is severely affected by climate change. But even Huber, an organic farmer, doubts whether the Ja-Parole is the right thing to do: "As a farmer, you almost have to be for a yes. As a SVP politician, it looks different." Huber understands that agriculture has to hold a slogan: "We must not talk ourselves out with voice clearance." He believes that abandoning a slogan could boost agricultural initiatives: "As an industry, we are under massive pressure. We need to set a signal what we want to do better. This can also be the case with CO2." Many people in Western Switzerland see this as similar. The peasant novel is most pressing for a yes. Is it successful? It's gonna show up soon.