Companies warn of failure No to CO2 law could harm workplace Switzerland David Vonplon 1100 companies today are freed from the CO2 levy. If the new CO2 law is rejected at the urn, this derogation expires – with severe consequences. David Vonplon Fuel oil and natural gas are to become more expensive. The CO2 levy on these fossil fuels is expected to rise from 96 francs per tonne to 210 francs. This is what it wants the new CO2 Act, which we will be discussing on 13 May. The vote will take place at the next voting time. The question of who can be exempted from the levy is therefore all the more important. Today, about 1100 companies are using this exception rule. They all emit more than 100 tonnes of CO2 per year and thus fulfil the requirement for exemption. In return, these companies must take climate measures in their operations, which reduce emissions. Exemption for all companies In the future, such target agreements should be able to be concluded by all companies, including hotel and craft enterprises. The extension of the instrument was a crucial reason for some business associations to stand behind the new CO2 law. "Many companies want and can contribute to the reduction of emissions," says Kurt Lanz of Economiesuisse. The new law would remove obstacles to entry thresholds. Economiesuisse assumes that in the future, significantly more companies will make use of this option and will be exempted from the obligation to pay dues thanks to a target agreement. In total, this could save 50 to 100 percent more CO2, says Lanz. There is a lot at stake for the economy. This is all the more so because, if the CO2 Act fails on the urn, the existing exemption from the CO2 levy would also lapse. Because this is limited until the end of 2021. And there is no connection solution without the new CO2 law. This would affect those 1100 companies that have already concluded a target agreement with a CO2 exemption. These are mainly companies from the metal and machinery industries, plastics processing and manufacturers of glassware, chemical and pharmaceutical products. These companies would have to expect significantly higher costs in the future. There is a threat of relocation The Swissmem Association is also strongly warning against the disappearance of existing programmes. In particular, the target agreements with tax exemption are a mandatory framework for the 150 energy-intensive companies, which still makes production in Switzerland possible. "If they fall away, the production location in Switzerland is seriously at risk," says Vice Director Jean-Philippe Kohl. "There would be operational tasks and production relocations abroad." According to Kohl, the global efforts to combat climate change would also be weakened. For example, companies would hardly have to conclude a target agreement on the use of fossil fuels abroad, in which they commit themselves to reducing CO2 emissions. A no to the CO2 law would also be problematic for the Swiss Steel Group, which operates a steel plant in Emmenbrücke. "The elimination of CO2 emissions would result in an enormous increase in costs for our company. Competitiveness would suffer greatly," says spokesperson Andrea Geile. It estimates that the CO2 dues for the company would be "a high single-digit million amount" annually. On request, Jacqueline Jakob, Director of the Energy Agency of the Economy (EnAW), stresses that the success model of the target agreements is at risk in the event of a no to the revised CO2 law. Positive dynamics would be slowed down as companies with the derogation saved more CO2 than originally planned. On behalf of the Federal Government, EnAW takes care that Swiss companies handle energy carefully. At present, 100 consultants are working for the Agency on a mandate basis. If the legal basis for the target agreement system is missing, the future of the EnAW and that of the competition organisation Act would be questioned. Closing the law gap The business associations hope that Parliament will create a transitional solution to secure today's practice if the CO2 law fails. Swissmem Vice-Director Kohl says: "An abrupt disappearance of this highly effective instrument in terms of climate policy would be a breach of confidence." This also applies to the enormous administrative effort that would have come to the companies that have taken climate action in recent years. Parliament had already advocated an extension of one year of the limited-term instruments in the CO2 Act in December 2019. This also included the target agreement system with the exemption of taxes. However, it refused to continue beyond 2021. It is questionable whether Parliament would be able to impose an extension of tax exemption within half a year if the CO2 Act failed. If it did not succeed in closing the legal gap in time, a longer period of uncertainty would threaten, says Kurt Lanz of Economiesuisse. This would not only put the companies concerned in a difficult situation. The economy's efforts to reduce greenhouse gases as a whole would also be significantly reduced.