«I'm amazed at my party» The Zurich City Councillor Filippo Leutenegger sees the FDP leadership in the CO2 Act on the wrong side Interview: Daniel Fritzsche The portrait photo has come into the years, but the message is clear: «Filippo Leutenegger votes no to the CO2 Act». With this ad, the No Committee has recently made social networks feel at home against the draft of the 13th century. ==References== The testimonial is not a "fake", emphasizes Leutenegger on the phone. The former FDP National Council and today's Zurich City Council is one of the most prominent "distinguishing" in the fight against the law, which was significantly influenced in Bundesbern by wild exponents. With his deployment, Leutenegger is in the final sprint of the heated vote struggle, but not only with his own party leadership, but also with the Zurich City Council, which has defined climate protection as an important goal. Mr. Leutenegger, Executive members usually hold back in voting campaigns. Why are you interfering in this case? In fact, I am always very reserved with such speeches. I have struggled for a long time, but then came to the conclusion that I cannot remain silent on the CO2 law. My liberal conscience has moved. I am a thoroughly liberal person, and as such I simply cannot support this proposal. Other liberals see it differently. The FDP President Petra Gössi and the Zurich FDP stand-up Ruedi Noser fight vehemently for the template. The free-minded have decided the Ja-parole. I'm amazed at my party. If I were still on the national stage, I would have actively opposed this misguided compromise. As a former spokesman for the FDP on energy issues, I always took care to defend our liberal economic order and constitution against dirigist interference and more taxes. But times seem to have changed. What are you accusing the party leadership of? The party's leadership wants to make a name for itself with environmental issues. I think that's good. But we should not swim with the stream for opportunistic reasons. As a liberal party, we should defend liberal positions that have made our country strong, even if we are facing. What does the CO2 Act specifically bother you? It's a very bad compromise. In the building area – the biggest lever in the fight against CO2 – we achieve virtually no steering effect. In fact, a new tax will be introduced. This is wrong in terms of regulation and not social. In the city of Zurich, 90 percent of the residents are tenants. You will have to bear the extra costs with the additional costs. In fact, this would have to cause an outcry among the left parties. Your suggestion? For homeowners who renovate their property in an environmentally conscious manner, clear cantonal specifications with a long horizon of time are effective. Energy investments should also be tax deductible. But that is not a question of debate. With your negative attitude, you just cement the status quo. We must move forward as we exit fossil fuels. There is a broad consensus. But not with measures that are burdensome and do not bring much. Personally, I take a good example: I upgrade my properties to heat pumps and solar. But something else bothers me about the new law. Namely? We are creating new subsidy pots, the so-called climate fund, which will then be used to support selected projects by the state. This may work at the beginning, and then it becomes a subsidy industry. Such ideas inhibit innovation rather than support it, and bring a lot of bureaucracy. We see this in many other areas. I also find the planned air ticket tax disturbing. It smells like indulgence for me. The Zurich City Council recently presented its ambitious net zero timetable by 2040. Do you not torpedo the efforts of your counterparts with your "no" recommendation on the CO2 law? No, we maintain the principle of collegiality, and of course we do not always have the same opinion in the city council. But the goal of overcoming the fossil age is right. It takes a lot of work, time and innovation, no more taxes and conducting requirements. Next February you would like to be elected again to the city council. The opposition to the CO2 law will be resented in red-green Zurich. We should be allowed to stand by our positions in our democracy without fear of disfellowshipping.