CO2 law: Well meant is not well done Guest commentary by Alain Schwald and Lukas Robers The global climate is warming up, and we will all suffer from it. There is reason enough to take effective and effective countermeasures. However, the largely undisputed finding that something needs to be done does not allow for a long time to come to an end on what should be done in concrete terms. Since climate change is a global problem, everyone must take part in the process; the Paris Agreement has tried to do so. However, it is becoming apparent that many countries will sooner or later not comply with it. If two out of three people worldwide live on less than $15 a day – that is over 5 billion people – their top priority is understandably not the global climate in 50 years. They want to raise their living standards, which is equivalent to higher energy consumption. They will take this energy from the most favourable sources. This will lead to more greenhouse gas emissions, unless the abandonment of fossil fuels has concrete advantages. So the alternatives must be cheaper. But that's exactly what the CO2 law fails. It consists of a plethora of regulations, prohibitions, taxes and taxes that no country will afford as long as there are people in poverty there. For Switzerland, this means two things: firstly, it must fulfil its obligations, as efficiently as possible, so that equally rich countries can take Switzerland as their model. This is due to a CO2 price or a CO2 price. CO2 trade and not achieved by regulation – virtually all national economies agree. It is important that the savings are made where they are also the most economical. A market does this much better than politicians who decide which technology they like best. The transport and building sector should be started. In the medium term, Switzerland would have to try to join the European emissions trading system and press for it to be extended to all sectors of the economy. Secondly, everything must be done to make the alternatives so cheap and robust that the use of fossil fuels is no longer worthwhile. This means far greater investment in research and development. While a certain part of the climate fund is earmarked for this, the approach is wrong because politicians and civil servants decide what to promote. Instead, Switzerland has to create framework conditions and incentives that encourage private actors to increase research and development in the field of climate-friendly technologies. In order to increase the chances of a breakthrough, the budget share for research to solve the climate problem must be increased. This money should be made available directly to universities and research institutes. If better framework conditions for research and development do not succeed, all efforts will ultimately be useless. With a share of global emissions of 0.1 percent, Switzerland can save as much as it wants – without imitators, this is in vain. The proposed CO2 Act, on the other hand, does not create an efficient system for the pricing of greenhouse gases, nor does it contain sufficient strong incentives for innovation. While the law can reduce CO2 emissions a little, it is only because of too high costs and the exclusion of the international component. Therefore, the law should be fundamentally revised and improved. Switzerland, with its possibilities, would have the responsibility to develop solutions that not only calm its own conscience, but which are so good that they can serve as a model for other states. Because when it gets too hot at some point, it is no longer fun to sunbathe in your own success. Alain Schwald and Lukas Robers are members of the Liberal Committee for Effective Environmental Policy.