How an SVP National Council wants to save the climate with hydrogen Christian Imark presents a 10-point plan that can help Switzerland reduce CO2 emissions much more cheaply. Proponents also see great potential in hydrogen. There is a catch, however. Christof Forster, Bern In these tanks hydrogen is delivered to the Coop hydrogen filling station in Hunzenschwil. Gaetan Bally / Keystone The Solothurn SVP National Councillor Christian Imark leads his party's campaign against the revised CO2 law. He is not one of those politicians who consider global warming to be an invention of science. Two years ago, in an SRF article, he said: "Since my daughter was born, I have been more concerned with what the future will look like. Also because of climate change». He showed the reporters the heat pump in the basement of his new family house. "Of course, it is not good to emit CO2," said Imark. It was not good for the air and not good for the climate. "Therefore, measures that reduce CO2 emissions are useful." However, the politician does not consider the new CO2 law to be useful. It costs the economy and the population billions and brings bans and patronage. This money redistribution operation does not bring added value to Switzerland. Instead, government governance creates new profits that would depend on the government's dripping. Christian Imark, SVP National Councillor Alessandro Della Valle / Kestone Imark propagates an alternative that relies on technical development and efficiency. On Monday, he presented a 10-point plan, which essentially focuses on hydrogen. But Imark's proposal to reduce CO2 does not work without money and the government's guiding hand. The plan is based on private initiative, complemented by selective state start-up funding, selective public investment and moderate legislative adjustments, the SVP National Council told the media. Imark stressed that it was not a project of his party. Store electricity with hydrogen According to the 10-point plan, the technical solution to the CO2 problem lies with hydrogen. With it, the electricity can be stored, which is produced with wind turbines or photovoltaic systems, but is not needed. Running hydroelectric power stations could also be better exploited and operated more economically thanks to the storage of surplus electricity, said Hans Kellner. He is the head of Messer Switzerland, which produces industrial gases. Waiter has delivered the technical aspects to Imark's climate plan. By electrolysis, the current can be converted into hydrogen and can be stored. Part of it can be fed into the natural gas network, where it replaces fossil gas. According to Kellner, hydrogen can also replace natural gas as fuel directly in industrial plants. When the hydrogen is produced with renewable electricity, it is CO2-neutral. "The technology has been around for decades," said waiters. Neighbouring countries were counting on it, unfortunately Switzerland did not. According to the waiter, the traffic, which is responsible for one third of CO2 emissions, can also be easily switched to hydrogen. Hydrogen buses and trucks are on the move in Switzerland. They are equipped with fuel cells in which hydrogen and oxygen react and the resulting energy drives the electric motor. For buildings, waiters also see potential in hydrogen. In Brütten an apartment building was built, which completely self-catering. The excess electricity from the photovoltaic system is converted into hydrogen and stored in this way. The recovery of electricity produces heat that is used for heating. Proponents also see potential in hydrogen What sounds good in theory has a big catch in practice: There are large losses in the conversion of electricity into hydrogen and back into electricity. Waiter doesn't deny the problem. It was intensively researched to improve efficiency. It was also better to use excess photovoltaics. The 10-point plan also requires investment. However, Imark cannot quantify their extent. In any case, an implementation plan would be necessary. But the SVP National Council knows so much: its plan would be cheaper than the new CO2 law. SP National Councillor Roger Nordmann, a supporter of the new CO2 law, sees a potential in hydrogen as a storage medium. But this is no reason to reject the CO2 law. On the contrary, the new climate fund could support projects to promote hydrogen technology.