Summa summarum is the rapped the currency Switzerland politicizes like a people of accountants. Everywhere is counted, calculated and accounted for. But every bookkeeping is closed after a year. It can't be that simple. Angelika Hardegger The writer Peter Bichsel once wrote that Switzerland has seven financial departments. The costs are "always discussed first and often the only one". Bichsel noted the observation during a visit to Parliament. But the statement applies to all Swiss politics, especially where it is most directly lived: on the urn. ==References== June is the time again, Switzerland is voting. A new climate policy and a ban on pesticides are under discussion. In other words, it would be a question of debate. Because Switzerland is debating very little in the vote – it is counting. And she's making it too easy. For example, the Swiss Farmers' Association. In the fight against pesticides, he reckons that food would be more expensive under a ban. There are many arguments against a ban on pesticides. The warning of higher prices is the cheapest of them. The farmers' association complains on every other occasion that the food is too cheap. The common Swiss spends only a fraction of the salary on food, it says. That you would like to give up money from the state if people were willing to pay more for the food. Five weeks before the urn, everything is different, because the farmers' campaign leaders know that the cost argument works. Polls after votes prove this over and over again. This is why the most important topic of the 13th century is also discussed. June, under the CO2 Act, anywhere quantified, calculated and accounted for. In general, the law determines Switzerland's future climate policy. In small cases, it includes taxes on fuel oil, natural gas and air tickets, a reimbursement via the health insurance fund and a support fund for climate-friendly technology. Now you could discuss the big one. For example, about global warming. But Switzerland goes its own way. She argues: Who benefits? Who's paying? How profitable is climate protection? The SVP plays the accountant of the "Büezer". In a campaign video, it lets a Hufschmied from Zurich calculate the extra expenditure: 1500 francs for fuel, 700 francs for fuel oil, 300 francs for flights for training. The bottom line is a minus of 2500 francs a year. The SVP underlines double and red. The Sunday newspaper is revising. It refers to a study of proponents and writes that the law meets less Büezer than multi-flying good-earners. The «View» calculates for the Baumgartner family, a lawyer named Bucher and the student Keller. Meanwhile, the NZZ refutes on its own account that the country pays net more than the city, because city dwellers flow more frequently and heat with oil. And the "Tages-Anzeiger" anticipates that a family of four in the single-family house with 130 square meters of living space and a fuel oil requirement of 2000 litres would have between 312 and 600 francs extra costs, of which 348 francs would be reimbursed via the health insurance. Summa summarum is the currency in the Helvetic climate policy of the Rappes. We discuss the problem using four factors: tank size. Dangerous kilometers. Heatings. Miles. And the obsession of the numbers has captured both sides: proponents like opponents. Environment Minister Simonetta Sommaruga opened the vote with the words: "Gletscher melt. There are more heat waves and dry periods. Murders and landslides are increasing. This is not only dangerous, but also expensive."The Federal Councillor places the same message in every interview and at every press conference: that climate protection is profitable. Long term. This is politically clever, because: see above. But the method accountants produces a limited view of things. There are other factors that belong to the calculation. For example, the course of things in the rest of the world. The US is back on the climate stage, and the big issuers are increasingly setting ambitious targets. At the April climate summit, China confirmed that it no longer wants to emit greenhouse gases in 2060. The US is targeting climate neutrality ten years earlier, like the UK, France, Germany and Switzerland. Even Brazil wants to participate in the climate competition: President Jair Bolsonaro promises "net zero" for 2050. Bolsonaro, the rainforest deforester, the caricature of environmental sin, thus formulates the same climate goal as Switzerland. Of course, a target is not yet a plan. It is uncertain how any of the net zero targets can be achieved. This also applies to Switzerland's climate target. The CO2 Act is the first step towards climate neutrality. Let's say no, let's leave a path that's just half the world. Then we're the first country to abandon its climate target. Instead of just counting, we could discuss: do we want to? Are we really able to create net zero without nuclear power? What is the place of new technology in our climate policy? Is the policy that is now in place – with a support pot here, a levy – really the best policy? Would there be simpler solutions and more elegant ones? The whole Helvetic petty climate policy is too big a topic for it to be discussed on the basis of personal accounting. And the climate is just one example of many. In the pension reform, individual computing is driven into excess: who loses where for how long? No one must be short-lived: not the previous pensioners and not the early ones. Not the married, not the single – and certainly not the women. It would be the purpose and purpose of the whole exercise that in the foreseeable future someone will get less. Because the boys don't get anything else in the end. So we're never going to solve the pension problem if everyone does the accounting for themselves. Because every personal accountancy is closed after twelve months. But pension policy affects generations. It raises questions whose answers can never only consist of numbers: How do we weight justice between generations? How does the freedom of today's pensioners to the freedom of pensioners tomorrow work? We hardly discuss this openly, we prefer to lose ourselves in details. For freedom and justice are great concepts, and Switzerland is fond of the diminutive. We don't even do "bookkeeping." We do the "milk box bill". This shows the whole Helvetic trifle. We want it simple and simple, and the bottom line is everything is easier. The bottom line is there is no if and but, no both-as-also. There is only either-or, black or red, gain or loss. Accounting is a system without uncertainty. Those who have ever enjoyed an introduction to accounting know the satisfying feeling: book. You're counting. Then you draw a line. And if it's equal to having, if all accounts are open, if everything is balanced, then you have certainty. That it's right. The certainty that something is right is lacking in politics. There can never be: what is right for some is wrong for others. This makes the accountant's approach all the more tempting. Accounting is complete, orderly, factual and documented. It creates order and overview. It clears up in a policy of allegations and phrases. The end is settled But accounting is often deceptively simple. Anyone with his nose in the cash register can never see the big picture. He will never see long-distance destinations and see questions that the future will ask. This requires imagination, ideas and then and when a vision. But visions do not arise in simple calculation. For visions, there is no room in a system that doubles control everything and that must always be balanced. The construction of the Gotthard tunnel was first a vision and then a financial debacle. He has also promoted the country to the industrial age. Switzerland benefits from the widespread awareness that "the economy" is all of us. But economics is more than accounting. And democracy? You anyway. We live a form of participation that no other government of the world trusts its people. It can't be as simple as accounting. Those who are stuck with their noses in the cash register will never see long - distance destinations and recognize questions that the future will ask. This requires imagination, ideas and then and when a vision.