EU climate tariffs come: new conflicts are programmed The EU wants to take a leading role in climate policy with high CO2 prices and a greenhouse gas tariff. How the United States and China react to this is still open. The measure would also have an impact on Switzerland. Gerald Hosp, Martin Lanz, Christoph G. Schmutz, Brussels It is a cumbersome word: border settlement system. The underlying idea of a climate tariff has been discussed for years and has long been considered impractical in its implementation. However, since the EU Commission propagated tariffs on greenhouse gases as an important part of its climate policy, the discussion has become more heated. In mid-July, Brussels will present detailed plans for such a mechanism in a large climate package. Climate policy and open markets This also has an impact on Switzerland: In May, the Economic Commission of the National Council submitted a motion to the Federal Council to initiate steps towards Switzerland's participation in the planned EU CO2 limit equalisation system. Last year, the Foreign Policy Commission of the National Council adopted a postulate calling on the Federal Council to examine the introduction of climate tariffs. Should the CO2 law be adopted by the people at the urn, Switzerland would once again increase one of the world's highest explicit CO2 prices. This raises the question whether climate policy is compatible with an open-market trading system. The basic idea is simple: if one country is pursuing a stricter climate policy than another, the production of CO2-intensive goods could migrate from the first country. This would have economic disadvantages. Moreover, the global climate would not be helped because emissions would be generated elsewhere. A greenhouse gas levy at the border could put a stop to this behaviour. However, the assessment of the effects is not easy: for some, such a mechanism is an important step towards decarbonisation and an important element for a climate club of the willing countries. For others it is protectionism in the green coat, a bureaucracy monster or even a reason for new trade wars. Ideas have leaked What the EU is planning to do is only known in terms of approaches. However, individual ideas and a first draft of the proposed regulation have already been leaked to the media, and guidance can also be found in the consultation documents. According to the EU's draft, climate tariffs would be applied to all trading partners. Only Switzerland as well as the other Efta countries Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein would be excluded for the time being. At the end of 2019, in the midst of the struggle for the framework agreement, Berne and Brussels linked their emissions trading systems. This, together with the comparatively high CO2 emissions in Switzerland, seems to play a decisive role. The Commission may exempt third countries from the levy if they are integrated into the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) or if they have signed an agreement to connect their trading system to that of the EU. For the time being, the EU plans are about burdening imports in such a way that producers in the EU have the same amount of tarts as their competitors outside the internal market. Whether exports will benefit from subsidies in reverse is still open. So far, the EU Commission has not expressed any such intentions. However, companies such as the British-Swiss petrochemical group Ineos demand export aid for export-oriented sites – for example, for the factory in Antwerp, Belgium. Brussels is currently evaluating three possible forms of the planned border equalisation mechanism: firstly, a tax on certain imported and domestically manufactured products; secondly, a tax or a customs duty only on imports; and thirdly, an extension of the ETS to imports. The draft regulation is now only about a levy on imports. This is mainly intended to affect goods where the risk of a migration of climate-damaging production is high. According to the first plans, the Commission intends to impose only a burden on steel, cement, aluminium, fertilizer and electricity. In the consultation, basic chemicals and oil were also particularly frequently mentioned as other candidates. Due to the complex global value chains, it is difficult to determine how much CO2 is contained in a highly processed product. This is probably one of the reasons why the Commission is initially limited to low-processed products. To determine their CO2 content, Brussels wants to use standard sizes that it has developed for industrial processes under the ETS. However, foreign producers would be able to demonstrate lower emissions and pay less. In addition, they could be charged taxes on CO2 paid abroad. In concrete terms, importers would have to buy an electronic certificate for each tonne of CO2 contained in the imported products. The price should be based on that of the ETS. This has doubled since the end of last year and currently amounts to around € 50 per tonne of CO2. Those who do not comply with the requirements or who do not provide the necessary information should pay a penalty that could be the triple price of the regular import certificate. It is still unclear what is to be done with the compensatory measures already provided for in the ETS. Installations which are part of the ETS and are exposed to a significant risk of emigration are now receiving free certificates. These cover the entire emissions of the most efficient factories and power plants. This is to prevent them from being too disadvantaged against foreign competition. From 2013 to 2020, 43% of the total amount of allowances was allocated free of charge. Airlines, for example, received almost all the necessary papers for free during this period. The EU Court of Auditors recently criticised the lack of focus and generosity in awarding contracts. The free allocation will be gradually reduced. For the Commission, however, the proposed border levy is now a substitute and not a complement to the existing practice. Therefore, after a possible transition period of up to 2035, there should be no free certificates. In any case, the calculation of a border settlement is complex, the bureaucratic effort is immense. Simplification of the mechanism can also lead to distortions: for example, if industry or country averages are used to assess the carbon content of a good, companies that are heavily polluting could even gain a competitive advantage. Efforts to implement WTO rules Brussels is thus pushing forward the plans for a border levy, so uncertain is whether such a mechanism is compatible with the rules of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). In principle, they prohibit discrimination between trading partners and unequal treatment of domestic and imported goods, but they also allow exemptions for environmental goods. One rule also states that, in certain circumstances, a levy can be levied equivalent to an internal tax. Sometimes a VAT system is introduced as a model. In the EU, the head has been broken for some time now as to what a WTO-compliant design of a climate tariff should look like. In principle, however, an import levy is possible, it is said by many experts. However, the details of the compensation mechanism were highly relevant. More difficult is a refund on exports, as some EU companies demand when an import price is to be paid at the same time. This could also explain why the EU's proposals so far known are limited to the import side. But even if the legal hurdles can be overcome, the countries concerned should draw the EU rules before the WTO arbitration tribunal, which is currently blocked. That would be the ultimate test of whether a border balance complies with their rules. Last year, several WTO members had already taken a critical look at the EU's plans. Some of them accused Brussels of introducing the mechanism not primarily for climate protection reasons, but with the intention of increasing revenue and protecting EU companies. The plans make important EU trading partners nervous, including China, Russia and Turkey. If the measure is classified as protectionist, it could be the seed for further trade conflicts. Developing countries and emerging economies also claim that border settlement is unfair because most greenhouse gases that have so far been emitted have been dumped by developed countries. Exports of poorer countries could be unduly disadvantaged. Sam Lowe of the Centre for European Reform think tank therefore proposes that the poorer countries, which already enjoy customs privileges from the EU, should also be excluded from border settlement. The economist Stefan Kooths from Kiel Institute for the World Economy prefers another solution: the revenues from the EU border levy are to be shared with the supplier countries. This would mitigate the risk of a trade conflict. Options for Switzerland If the EU's climate tariff is already in place in 2023, frictions with the largest trading partners are programmed. And the Efta countries excluded from border settlement must decide how they stand up to third countries in order not to serve as a gateway for CO2-intensive products into the EU. In relation to the population and economic performance, Switzerland's CO2 emissions are low in an international comparison. However, the Swiss economy imports many CO2-intensive products and therefore emits more CO2 abroad than in its own country. This is also why Switzerland has a reputation for high greenhouse gas taxes in combination with a border settlement. However, the Economiesuisse Economic Association sees no need for a separate border settlement mechanism in Switzerland, which would mean high costs for companies. Rather, Switzerland should not be affected by the EU mechanism because the emissions trading systems are already linked, says Kurt Lanz of Economiesuisse. Nevertheless, Lanz is critical of Brussels' unilateral action: "The EU is not large enough to force other large countries alone to take climate action. A better solution would be to forge global alliances in advance to create a climate club." The focus is on the United States and China. Who wants a climate club? The idea of a climate club of willing countries goes back to economist William Nordhaus. The latter proposes a fine for countries that do not want to participate in certain climate measures. But even a border settlement could form the basis for such a club. Such hopes are born up with President Biden taking office in the United States. Its government is actually talking about the introduction of a US border settlement and climate cooperation with Brussels, but without ever becoming concrete. The US has not yet seen a national emissions trading system or a national carbon tax. A CO2 price derived from this would be the prerequisite for setting a climate tariff. China is one step ahead in this regard. The country-wide trading of emission allowances is about to begin. First of all, however, only China's energy producers, which are responsible for more than 30% of the annual CO2 emissions, participate. And the price per tonne of carbon dioxide will remain far below European levels in the foreseeable future. Therefore, the signs do not initially stand for a cooperation between the three largest economic areas initiated by the EU border settlement. Rather, there could be a confrontation. The plans make important EU trading partners nervous, including China, Russia and Turkey. California as so often in the pioneer role mla. · There is no national carbon price in the US, but various national and regional initiatives. The ETS of the US state of California is the only application for a CO2 limit equalisation mechanism worldwide. However, the mechanism is only applied to electricity imports. The reason is that the Californian electricity sector is strongly linked to the neighbouring countries as well as to parts of Canada and Mexico as part of the Western Interconnection. In 2015, one third of Californian electricity was imported. The high import rate means that the collection of imported electricity must be an important part of the emissions trading system. In California, electricity importers must acquire emission rights for imported electricity. The source is the source of the source. A standard rate of 0.428 tonnes of CO2 per megawatt hour is used to determine the CO2 content of the imported electricity. At the beginning of April 2021, according to World Bank data, California cost a tonne of CO2 equivalent $ 17.90. In fact, electricity would be predestined for border balancing mechnanism because it is a homogeneous product for which generally good data are available. However, as is shown in California, the interchangeability of electrons is a major challenge. For years, a so-called "resource shuffling" has been taking place with which the system is being undermined. This refers to contractual mixed maneuvers: regional market participants put on electricity supply contracts in such a way that the imports subject to the California border settlement are low CO2 content and come from clean sources, while dirty high carbon footprint electricity is provided for other less stringent jurisdictions. In other words, a Californian electricity supplier, which until now imported electricity produced by coal, is switching to gas-based electricity in response to climate tariffs, or perhaps even cleaner electricity. The dirty coal stream is then simply sold to another state. As a result, overall greenhouse gas emissions are increasing, although emissions under the emissions trading scheme seem to be falling. In other words, the "carbon leakage" of dirty production to "foreign" is not prevented. In California, this problem was well aware of the design of the border balancing mechanism. Therefore, the original submission explicitly prevented such contractual mixed maneuvers. In practice, however, a softer regime was imposed on the pressure of the importers concerned. California's experience shows how important it is to commit all affected groups to taking part in climate policy. Otherwise, with the same volume of trade, the production of clean installations flows mainly into the right-hand area with border balancing, without affecting the total emissions. This problem is likely to be well known to the Brussels climate architects. Deliveries of high "CO2 content" steel, for example from China, would be affected by a European climate tariff. Damir Sagolj / Reuters