Big advantage for supporters of the Covid and Terrorism Act: SRG survey results five times Yes to the proposals of June 13. About seven weeks before the voting Sunday, according to the SRG trend survey, all the federal proposals would have been adopted. Clear majorities receive the Covid-19 and the Terrorism Act. It also looks good for the CO2 Act. The agricultural initiatives could be short-lived. Frank Sieber There are still two positive comments on agricultural initiatives. The race remains open until the vote on 13 March. ==References== Peter Schneider / Keystone It is a snapshot and not a prognosis, as the researchers at GfS Bern emphasize. However, the conditions that are shown in their first trend survey on behalf of the SRG are in part so clear that they are to be concluded for the outcome on the 13th October. ==References== In the referendum on the Covid-19 law, for example, which regulates, among other things, the economic emergency aid, two thirds of the participants voted in favour in the survey carried out about seven weeks before the vote and only 27 percent opposed it. The authors of GfS Bern, too, therefore assume that the presentation is clearly accepted, as it is stated in the documents published on Friday. In any case, this is to be expected in the normal case where opinions tend to be even more guided by the recommendations of the Federal Council and Parliament for the vote. Surprising developments, however, cannot be ruled out. Until now, however, the opponents outside the SVP and government-critical circles hardly respond. The anti-terrorism measures were also widely supported in the survey. This law allows the police to take preventive action against suspected threats if there are concrete indications of terrorist threats. Again, a good two-thirds said yes, while only one in four wanted to reject the proposal. The majority of all parties, the Greens (52 percent) and the SP (55 percent) were most closely associated with the no-parole. Even further away from its base, however, is the GLP, whose voters, despite the party's no recommendation, said 70 percent yes. However, according to GfS Bern, opinion formation is still the least advanced. There was therefore room for the campaigns to influence the outcome. The third government bill, the CO2 Act, also clearly sets the agenda. Here 60 percent more or less said yes, 35 percent said "certain" or "more" no. In this business, the participants better follow the guidelines of their preferred party: In the left spectrum up to the GLP, there is a high approval of the CO2 law. In the middle, the proponents are also in the majority, with a no share of about a third. On the other hand, the FDP base had a stalemate, while the supporters of the SVP clearly said no. The CO2 Act lays down measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, including higher taxes on fuel oil and gas, a tax on tickets and stricter limit values for new cars and buildings. The aim is to halve greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared to 1990 and the domestic share should be at least 75 percent. The situation in the two people's initiatives is less clear. In the drinking water initiative, which aims to increase the ecological requirements for agriculture to protect drinking water, 54 percent went to the yes and 40 percent to the no side. In the left-hand spectrum, the desire is much more supported than with the citizens. In addition, there is a clear city-country grave with a high approval in the city (65 percent) and a significantly lower one in the country (41 percent). What this result means for the outcome of the vote is left open by opinion polls. The intentions of the vote and the attitudes to the arguments speak for a controversial debate, whereby a (knappe) acceptance of the drinking water initiative is conceivable without change of opinion, they write. The initiative "for a Switzerland without synthetic pesticides" which Switzerland wants to make a bioland for plant protection is similar: 55 percent of supporters are opposed to 42 percent of opponents. The party policy pattern is also similar to that of the drinking water initiative. Only the GLP shows a clear difference. At 66 percent, the approval of their sympathizers in this referendum is seven percentage points smaller. On the basis of the centre, however, the drinking water initiative enjoys a five-point higher approval. It will therefore be interesting to see how the attitudes towards the initiatives will develop and whether these developments will be parallel. But it should not be easy for both desires to save the lead to the goal. Initiatives often show a high level of support, which decreases by the date of the vote. Or as opinion pollers say: "The weaknesses in the final vote often become more important than in the first assessment of initiatives."