Switzerland is missing the climate target for 2020: above all, transport emits more than hoped for Transport in particular emits more than hoped for. Switzerland is thus not keeping its promise under the Kyoto Protocol. Gioia da Silva Whether it's for buildings, transport, industry or agriculture, the Federal Office for the Environment (Bafu) expects Switzerland to have missed its climate targets for 2020. Precise figures are only available for 2019. However, the Bafu already assumes that Switzerland has not complied with its promise under the Kyoto Protocol. According to the Uno Convention on Climate Change, Switzerland should have reduced its greenhouse gas emissions by 20 percent between 1990 and 2020. By 2019, however, only 14 percent savings have been achieved. Switzerland is thus also missing the climate targets in the current CO2 law. The target for emissions and effective emissions differ, especially in transport. Here Switzerland would have wanted to reduce the outbreak by 10 percent since 1990. In fact, more greenhouse gases were emitted in 2019 than in 1990. Although the average vehicle on Swiss roads has become more efficient, it covers a total of more kilometres than 30 years ago. In addition, the number of private cars has increased by over 50 percent since 1991. Overall, the greenhouse gas emissions in transport have increased by around one percent, as hoped, by 10 percent, says Bafu. The fact that the climate targets in transport have been clearly missed is particularly important because transport in Switzerland is responsible for around one third of the total greenhouse gas emissions. No other sector is polluting anymore. Buildings and industry are also too strong In the building sector, some 34 percent of emissions were saved compared to the base year 1990, which corresponds to a reduction of around 0.3 million tonnes of CO2 per year. If this trend was confirmed in 2020, the reduction target of minus 40 percent was clearly missed. In the industrial sector, greenhouse gas emissions have been reduced by around 14 percent since 1990. The target of minus 15 percent seemed to be achievable, but the outburst of industry has remained stable in recent years. The figures for 2020 confirm this trend, which Bafu expects, and the reduction target was also missed in the industrial sector. For the other sectors, no specific requirements have been laid down in the current CO2 legislation. Nevertheless, it was assumed that emissions from these sources could be reduced by around 10 percent. This guideline could not be met, says Regine Röthlisberger, head of the Climate Reporting section at Bafu. In agriculture, around 12 percent less greenhouse gases were emitted in 2019 than 30 years ago, says Röthlisberger. However, many synthetic greenhouse gases had not yet been used in 1990 when defining the benchmarks. The Federal Office for the Environment can estimate the impact of the Corona crisis on energy consumption and emissions in Switzerland in about a year.