Plant more trees and secure the flow of cool air: With these measures, the Zurich government councillor Martin Neukom wants to prevent heat jams In hot summers, global warming can hit the mind and health. Now the communities should be given more opportunities to prevent this. Stefan Hotz So much green would be better: the garden city of the family home cooperative Zurich in Friesenberg. Christian Beutler / Keystone Climate protection has two sides: one is combating the causes of warming by reducing the emission of greenhouse gases. The CO2 Act, which will be voted on in June, or the Cantonal Energy Act, which the Cantonal Council adopted a month ago, serve this objective. Secondly, the aim is to mitigate the effects of climate change. This includes improved flood protection, for example, because the heavy rains are increasing. It is also noticeable and measurable that summers are getting hotter on average. This is especially noticeable by the inhabitants in the cities. In densely populated areas, the temperature is sometimes up to 10 degrees higher than in rural areas. Winterthur climate map: The inner city becomes a heat island. BD For several years there have been maps on which you can see where the heat is stifling and the air is not really cooled at night. Buildings and plants as well as sealed surfaces heat up during the day by the sunlight and release the stored heat at night. For older and sick people, such heat islands are a health burden. Reinforce tree protection The cantonal construction directorate has now prepared a template to counter this. What can be done against too much heat is known. However, some of the legal bases are missing to be able to act. Principles and targets for public investments are set out in Part-Revision 2020 of the indicative plan, which is already in progress. Now the construction director Martin Neukom (Green) sends adjustments to the planning and construction law as well as to various regulations into the consultation. According to Neukom, the aim of the revision is primarily to give the municipalities more opportunities. Accordingly, it contains several can formulations. The intention is to preserve large trees in the settlement area and to achieve that more trees are generally planted. According to Neukom, about one percent of the trees fall victim to construction projects in the settlement area of the city of Zurich every year. Although new trees are planted, they do not offset the loss for a long time. Big old trees don't just give a lot of shade. They evaporate hundreds of litres of water in a day, which removes heat from the environment. This is why the municipalities and cities should be given the opportunity to better protect the trees in already green quarters and to introduce a duty to plant trees in areas with too little green in new buildings. The corresponding regulations are to be anchored in the municipal building and zone regulations. However, too many buildings in the underground often prevent enough soil from being present so that larger trees can form roots. The municipalities should therefore be able to restrict the construction of land. There are two variants to the discussion: Either the eligible proportion of the land area that may be undercut, for example, is limited to 60 percent. Or an underground car park may be created only under one part of the green area. A planned provision can be used by landowners and builders directly for themselves. Today small trees must have a distance of four meters to the neighboring plot, large trees eight meters (see graph). This distance is to be reduced to two meters. The rule is to be lifted towards a street, as is already the practice in Zurich and Winterthur. Planned reduction of the current border distances from trees to neighboring plots (left) and roads. BD Martin Neukom is not afraid that this will lead to more conflicts. Branches that rise into another property are occasionally the subject of legal proceedings. Often, a neighborhood dispute that has other causes is only about building law, said the construction director. Moreover, the rule of separation in the Civil Code dates back to 1911. Furthermore, the municipalities should be able to adopt new regulations on the greening of roofs and building facades. This is also a contribution to the conservation of biodiversity. The canton thus implements a motion that the cantonal council overridden last summer. Rainwater should leak The only mandatory provision that the canton makes binding is the so-called desealing of the soil. With larger redesigns of surrounding areas the rainwater must be able to seep away. This also applies to parking spaces that can be made permeable thanks to composite stones. Neukom refers here to the obligation according to the Swiss law on natural and homeland protection to contain the sealing of the soil. Finally, the «climate-adapted settlement development», as the name of the template implies, also includes the securing of a good ventilation. Measurements and tests have shown how lock-like buildings sometimes prevent the cooler air from the hills around Zurich and Winterthur to the inner city at night. Cities are now to be given additional skills to integrate cold air flows into their planning. This provision concerns landowners. However, Neukom stressed on Monday before the media that they also benefited if this improved the situation in an entire neighborhood. He denied that the template was above all a Lex Zurich and Winterthur. The problem of heat congestion is the biggest in the centres, but it also occurs in the agglomeration and sometimes small cities.