"The FDP is committed to a red-green template" – "Chabis, the CO2 law is liberal" The SVP boss Marco Chiesa and the FDP president Petra Gössi are fighting over bourgeois politics, red-green competition and the Federal Council. Only at the BAG are the two in conversation with Christina Neuhaus and Fabian Schäfer agree Christina Neuhaus Fabian Schäfer Mr. Chiesa, in mid-April you warned the FDP Federal Councils that «permanent pacting with the left» could «reveal» in the next elections in 2023. Why is the SVP suddenly threatening to vote off the free-minded federal councils? Marco Chiesa: That's not a threat, that's a reality: if the FDP continues to lose voter shares, then its second federal seat is at risk. It is also a reality that the free-minded Federal Councils do not make liberal policies over long distances. Furthermore, the SVP stands for the proven arithmetic concordance. According to their electorate, the four largest parties are said to be represented in the Federal Council. They have described the FDP Federal Councils as disoriented and accused them of making pacts with the left. The second seat of the Bundesrat was therefore no longer politically justified. One could choose a green liberal right away. Chiesa: Then at least the balance of power in the Federal Council would be clearly declared. Now we are constantly talking about a bourgeois majority that de facto does not exist. May I quote Felix E. Müller from a column of the former editor-in-chief of the NZZ on Sunday? "If the FDP does not pay attention, it is like the liberals in Germany: it shrinks to a small party, without a right to two Federal Council seats." Petra Gössi: This was a completely deposed threat. At least it's nice to hear that the SVP is obviously at the concordance after all. Your permanent opposition to the policy of the Federal Council suggests that you have turned your back on the concordance. And by the way, if you were to lead the arithmetic concordance as the only criterion, you should not have taken the CVP into account in the last elections. Mrs. Gössi, you have advised the SVP to leave the Federal Council in return. Would you prefer a centre-left federal council? Gössi: If the SVP continues to do so, this discussion can no longer be avoided. Their confrontation course questions the meaning of concordance. Even on issues on which we would agree, cooperation with the SVP is difficult. If it wants to help shape solutions, it must be willing to compromise. FDP and SVP are both bourgeois parties. But if the SVP only pursues opposition policy for protest voters, we soon lack the potential for votes for bourgeois solutions. Then the weights in Parliament inevitably shift towards the left. Chiesa: I notice that a so-called concordance in terms of content would therefore be a concordance between the free sense and the left in the understanding of Petra Gössi. But on one point we agree: our parties should work better together. But what does the FDP do? She's campaigning for the left-wing CO2 law. .. Gössi:. .. Chabis, this is a liberal law that prevents eight billion Swiss francs per year from flowing into the oil states. .. Chiesa:. .. and the FDP supports the fire-prone framework agreement with the EU. Obviously, it did not help us with the Corona policy either, otherwise the openings would have come earlier. SVP and FDP together would have a majority in the Federal Council. The alternative to a second federal FDP council would be a federal council member of the Greens or one of the Green Liberals. Would you prefer that? Chiesa: Of course not. But given the policy that the two FDP Federal Councils operate, a green or green-liberal Federal Council would not change much in terms of content. But the relationship would at least be honest. We want a bourgeois majority with FDP federal councils that make a clear bourgeois policy. This also applies to the party. Petra, if you would return to your liberal principles, we could achieve a lot together. The CO2 law is not liberal, it is a bureaucratic monster that will cost us dearly. Gössi: Not at all! If the left had asserted itself, the law would consist mainly of prohibitions and levies. Thanks to the FDP, we now have a liberal law that relies on incentives and steering charges. If the SVP had better supported us, we would have had to make even fewer concessions to Red-Green. This is precisely the problem: with whom should we work out such templates when the most elective bourgeois party withdraws to the trenches? Chiesa: The CO2 law is not a liberal law. You're harrowing the effects massively. But I guess you'll have to, after you missed a green paint before the last election. This law focuses primarily on redistribution and higher taxes: A billion Swiss francs should flow into the climate fund every year – someone has to pay for it, and it will be the middle class as always. We as citizens cannot approve of such extra burdens. Quite apart from the fact that the federal administration will grow by 80 jobs again because of this proposal. Gössi: When the SVP takes its place from the beginning, it also bears the responsibility for the solutions that have not failed as it imagined. In addition, the tax is refunded to the population, which will benefit small and medium-sized families in particular. Mr Chiesa, from the centre, too, comes the complaint that the SVP is too stubborn. There was little political compromise possible. Chiesa: These are excuses. In contrast to the centre and the FDP, we have a clear line and we are the only party to promote freedom and security. We are not making compromises, so we are so successful. There are also issues on which we work well with the FDP: we have fought together against the initiative for corporate responsibility, we have also been successful in the free trade agreement with Indonesia, and now we are also on the verge of finding a solution to retirement provision..... actually? This means that the SVP supports the AHV reform even if the financial compensation for women in return for the higher retirement age is now higher than previously planned? Chiesa: Of course, we would rather stay with the cheaper variant, as the Council of States has decided. But it is clear that the AHV needs rapid reform, and we will not cross it. This reform will not last long anyway, and we will have to talk about new solutions afterwards. Here too, I hope to have a good cooperation with the FDP. All Federal Council parties lose, while the eco-parties increase massively in the cantonal elections. How do you explain that? Chiesa: There has been a shift from the SP to the Greens and the FDP to the Green Liberals. The receipt for this policy will come because someone has to pay the bill. The effective government ratio has now reached almost 50 percent of GDP. I assume that the pendulum will strike back soon. Gössi: Many voters are no longer interested in the classical democratic institutions, and this disinterest of course increasingly affects the traditional parties. The young, successful parties have all the movement character. They communicate differently than we do. We can learn from that. We need to work out our liberal positions and values even better and communicate more skillfully. Our positions, which we have usually worked out at federal level, must also be heard in the communities. How? Gössi: A key is to pursue a better, more diverse personnel policy: to address more young people, to promote more women. Chiesa: You have to make a clear, unambiguous policy and say what is going on. This moralizing policy, which is "in", destroys many things. For example, if the two extreme agricultural initiatives are adopted, an entire industry will be destroyed. Many peasant families are then faced with ruin. In the past, there was, in addition to the old umbrella organisation of the economy, the suburb, the "economic promotion" as a campaign platform of the economy. Is there a need for a bourgeois campaign organization again? Chiesa: I'm skeptical. The SVP often struggles with the positions of the Economiesuisse, while the FDP often represents the interests of the global economy. We represent the middle class. Gössi: I have to vehemently contradict you now. We are not the party of big corporations. However, we note that the Swiss economy would not be equally efficient without large corporations. The importance of these world companies is evident, among other things, in the direct federal tax. Today, half of the federal taxes come from the companies' cash registers. SMEs and corporations are often played out against each other today. This is reflected in many voting campaigns. But it is wrong and dangerous because they depend on each other. Unfortunately, however, it is often no longer noticeable what is in the overall interest of the economy. I am not sure whether the old solution with suburban and economic development would really be the right solution. But the proposal is definitely worth examining. Even during the pandemic, FDP and SVP have rarely found themselves. Why didn't you come together here? This would have been a strong counterweight to the Federal Council and the Federal Office of Health (BAG). Chiesa: That's what I was wondering. I'm sorry, but I'm just coming back to speak to the free-minded Federal Councils: FDP and SVP have four Federal Councils – with the support of the FDP, it would have been possible to stand up to health leaders Alain Berset and, for example, to open restaurant terraces earlier. No one understood why the Federal Council waited so long. Are you sure your federal councils have always been committed to more freedoms? Chiesa: Absolutely. Ueli Maurer once made public a misreport of the "day-indicator". Guy Parmelin is more reserved. But he also has a special role as President. Gössi: I'm sorry, but I have a whole different information. And by the way, Guy Parmelin has only been President since January. We, too, did not always agree with the decisions of the Federal Council. But we don't suddenly have a federal council or half a federal council like you when we have differences. Even if the SVP has trouble understanding this: The Federal Council must act independently of the parties. We as FDP have demanded early that the Federal Council show a perspective, for example with a traffic light system. Where was your support? Chiesa: We already presented our own strategy at the end of March 2020 and pointed out that the Federal Council does not protect the risk groups enough. This is a scandal: 10,000 people in Switzerland have died from this virus. More than 7000 of them were over 80 years old. The majority died in old age and care facilities. The protection of risk groups would also have been an appropriate subject for cooperation between the bourgeois parties. Chiesa: Of course. You can always do something better. But the main responsibility lies with the BAG. There have been so many failures, and even the many changes at the top of the BAG do not indicate a good lead. Does it need a critical review of the role of the BAG? Chiesa: Yes – and all of Corona's policy. Gössi: Yes. We need a critical review of pandemic policy. What lessons do you draw from pandemic policy? Gössi: The most important thing is that Switzerland must provide a huge effort in the digitalisation of healthcare and beyond. This is a massive backlog. The BAG in particular is called for. The Office has significant weaknesses. For example, there is an urgent need for more business professionals with an entrepreneurial background who are able to work with the private sector. Vaccine procurement has revealed major deficiencies. When we asked about the inconsistencies in the Lonza case, we noticed that there are gaps in knowledge in the BAG and that we did not know how a public-private partnership could work. The office needs more doctors, but today there is clearly a lack of medical knowledge at the top. Chiesa: Absolutely agree: The BAG did not have the pandemic under control, there are only officials and no one who thinks entrepreneurially and innovatively. Let's just remember all the breakdowns: the back and forth of the masks, the insufficient protection of the risk groups, the errors in obtaining the vaccine, the gaps in contact tracing. Federal Councillor Alain Berset bears overall responsibility for this. I'm not sure why he didn't pack his suitcase right away and fly to the USA to Moderna when the idea came up that the Bund could invest in Lonza. Gössi: There is another point we need to discuss. I, too, was in favour of the cantons having as much room for manoeuvre as possible and playing a strong role. After the experiences of the last few months, I have to say – as hard as it is as a convinced federalist – that in a crisis like this, it is likely that a stronger role of the federal government will be needed in the future. The interfaces between the federal government and cantons have to be redefined, especially in the case of digital solutions. Chiesa: The fact that the Federal Council has constantly overtaxed the cantons is part of the problem! In addition to the failure of the BAG, I see two big questions for the reprocessing: First, we have to examine the effects of the lockdown in detail. It is becoming increasingly clear that the Federal Council has completely underestimated the economic, social and psychological consequences. We must never repeat this mistake. Secondly, we must examine why Switzerland has failed to protect the risk groups. Two books have been published about Alain Berset in this crisis. He would have better had a reasonable concept of protection in nursing homes written, that would have done more. In such a crisis, the question arises as to how the mood in the population develops. How do you perceive that? And what is the responsibility of the parties? Gössi: In the weeks before the last openings, I perceived the mood as very irritable. She often tipped into resignation. If I'm not wrong, it's gonna be better. It is crucial that state measures are comprehensible and logical for the population. Why do I get to drive through the ski area in a busy bus for twenty minutes, but then not to have a coffee on the terrace? People don't understand that, and that's causing trouble. Chiesa: If you force a host to realize a protective concept for a lot of money – and then suddenly tell him that he has to close the business completely: logically, the bad mood. This is just one example of many. Of course, health care is a priority. But social contacts, professional fulfilment and perspectives are an equally important part of our lives. There were many unnecessary and arbitrary measures. Many media have also played an unspeakable role with their panic-machine. Hardly any journalist criticized the Federal Council. The parliament and the cantons could only write letters or participate in alibi consultations. That's all. That's wrong. Does this justify the accusation of dictatorship, as some SVP exponents have raised it? Chiesa: The accusation is absolutely true. Even though the Corona situation has relaxed massively, the Federal Council can practically still do what it wants. That's too far. Gössi: The accusation is completely wrong! You are the largest party in this country, you have two members in the Federal Council, you can say publicly what you want, you can launch initiatives, make proposals, vote in Parliament – and yet you speak of a dictatorship? It's just ridiculous. That the SVP brings this massive accusation in an already heated up mood, I think, is dangerous. The parties are also responsible. The SVP does not even support the Covid-19 Act, which enshrines financial aid. She doesn't want to take responsibility. Chiesa: It's not that simple. We are particularly concerned with the epidemic law: it is clear that the Federal Council needs extensive powers in an extraordinary situation. But now, in a special situation, his skills go far too far. We have to change that. Unfortunately, we cannot vote on this now. But because this question is closely linked to the Covid-19 law, we want to show with the vote clearance that the skepticism is great. Is Switzerland threatening a superstate? Chiesa: The administration grew by 660 jobs last year alone, the state rate is constantly rising. Every year new laws are passed without the old being put into effect. The SVP resists this development with all its strength. Gössi: The pendulum swings strongly towards a strong state. Now it's up to us citizens to make it swing back. We can only bring about a change of mind together. As long as the opinion dominates, the state will help me then nothing will change. Chiesa: Fortunately, the citizens are not blind. In a survey in March 2020, 39 percent said they feared a loss of personal freedom. In March 2021 it was already 64 percent. Gössi: However, the SVP's accusation of dictatorship will not help to bring about a change. We need to show how we can regain our old freedoms and why a free order is a better solution than a superstate. The greatest protection from a state that is proliferating is a militia parliament. Unfortunately, Parliament is moving towards a professional parliament. More and more parliamentarians are actually living off the income of politics.