Flight tax for the Climate Fund The controversial airbillion tax is primarily intended to finance subsidies Hansueli Schöchli Anyone who pollutes the environment should bear these costs themselves. This polluter pays principle is the core idea behind the CO2 levy. Currently, this levy is 96 Fr. per tonne of CO2 emissions; the statutory maximum is 120 Fr. The legislative revision decided by Parliament, on which the people are in June, increases the maximum to 210 Fr. per tonne. However, CO2 emissions are limited to fossil fuels such as fuel oil, natural gas and coal. Fuels are not included. This could be justified by reference to the high mineral oil tax on fuels. Per litre of petrol, this includes a supplement of about 77 Rp. ==References== are intended for road transport. The non-administered part corresponds to approximately 140 Fr. per tonne of CO2 emissions. Flexible lawyers Excluding CO2 emissions and mineral oil tax, however, is the fossil fuel used for international scheduled air transport. "The transnational nature of aviation and thus the more than 140 bilateral agreements between Switzerland and foreign countries exclude taxation of aviation fuels," the Federal Council stressed in its 2018 opinion on a proposal from the Parliament. Air transport from Switzerland accounts for around 10% of Switzerland's greenhouse gas emissions. According to international rules, however, the tax is permitted. However, this would require a change in the federal constitution. According to the traditional view, at least two-thirds of the income would have to be redistributed to the population so that the tax would not be an unconstitutional tax. However, the political wind changed the legal interpretation in the debate on CO2 law: the proposed airbillet levy suddenly only had to be redistributed to at least 51% of households and companies in order to be considered constitutionally compliant. The episode confirmed that lawyers can be very flexible. Thus the revised law now sees a "discharge" of 30 to 120 Fr. on billets for departures from Switzerland (without transit passengers). An illustration: The 30 Fr. Tax for a simple flight from Zurich to London corresponds to approximately 160 Fr. according to the CO2 calculator of Myclimate. per tonne of CO2 emissions. However, some players do not expect the airbillet tax to significantly reduce CO2 emissions – and not only because of potential customer evasiveness via foreign airports. Due to the integration of Swiss air traffic into the European emission allowance trading system and the global Corsia system, the planned Swiss flight billet tax is likely to result in a redistribution rather than a net reduction in CO2 emissions (see below). Page 1). Money for the honey pot The planned Swiss airbillet tax is therefore hardly a "reduction tax" against its label, but a new tax for the most intensive feeding of the subsidy pot called "climate fund". In the event of a flight volume such as the pre-crisis year 2019, the planned tax would yield annual revenues of around 1.3 billion. Fr. ==References====External links== Fr. flown into the subsidy pot. However, due to the pandemic, in 2022, the flight billet tax may be around 300 to 400 million. Fr. flow into this pot. Industry representatives want as much of these funds as possible to be used directly for aviation, in particular through subsidies to develop low-emission fuels. In the beginning, because of the lack of projects, only a small part of the climate fund funds should be allocated to aviation from the airbillion levy. How much this changes in the medium term is open. If expert reports and surveyed experts are believed, aviation can only achieve the declared goal of a net zero emission by 2050 with new fuels. The focus is on fuels based on biomass, such as waste oil and fats, as well as long-term CO2 from industrial processes or directly from the ambient air. The energy needed for this is to come from renewable sources, namely from the sun. Switzerland among people The development of low-emission aviation fuels is a global goal. According to experts surveyed, Switzerland has good opportunities to be a handful of leading sites for the development of alternative fuels. Among the Helvetic flagships is the company Synhelion, which emerged from ETH Zurich. In 2019, ETH had succeeded in producing liquid fuels from concentrated sunlight and air with a mini refinery on the roof. The system removes CO2 and water directly from the air. The two key points: the energy required for this is from renewable sources (sun), and the later combustion of the fuels produces only as much CO2 as the plant previously extracted from the ambient air. In 2024 Synhelion plans to put the first commercial plant into operation and achieve a production volume of 700 000 tonnes per year by 2030 – roughly half of Switzerland's kerosene consumption. Traditional kerosene currently costs about 50 Rp. per litre. Low-emission alternative fuels are five to ten times more expensive. "By 2030, we can reduce production costs to less than one franc per litre," says Synhelion. Representatives of the aviation industry expect the cost of low-emission fuels to fall to the price level of traditional kerosene by around 2040. Given the global trend in climate policy, "actually" development projects for alternative aviation fuels should sound interesting for private venture capitalists. According to observers, however, the interest of private investors has remained within the scope of this. A much-named threshold is the absence of acceptance guarantees for the fuel produced in the future from expensive pilot plants. The planned climate fund could, according to the Commission, subsidise such investments with up to 80% of the total cost.