FDP has trouble with environmental policy Christian Wasserfallen stands as an example of the party's indecisiveness in environmental proposals Christof Forster, Bern The Bernese FDP National Council Christian Wasserfallen is anything but an eco-turbo. A look at his Smartvote profile shows that he attaches almost as little importance to environmental protection as to an expansion of the welfare state. He criticized his party's environmental shift before the 2019 elections and resigned as Vice President. And now waterfalls in the Liberal Committee are working for the drinking water initiative. This way, he even overtakes prominent environmentalists in the green camp on the left – for example, the Basel-Bier stand councillor Maya Graf or the industry association Bio Suisse, who reject the initiative. Thus he is quoted in the documents of the Pro-Committee: «Drinkwasser is heavily under pressure in Switzerland and in relation to intensive agriculture a problem which concerns the people.» Has the National Council become Paul practically overnight from environmental Saul? Or does he show the FDP's lack of orientation in environmental issues? In the National Council, waterfalls still voted against the initiative. Three abstained, but no FDP politician was in favour of the referendum. "After that, there were two decisions that caused me to change my mind," says Wasserfallen. Parliament had postponed agricultural reform 22+, with which the Federal Council wanted to make agriculture more ecological, to Saint Nimmerlein's Day. In addition, the Parliament had watered down a kind of indirect counterproposal to the drinking water initiative to the point of being unrecognizable. Waterfalls says: "It's not about green politics, it's about how we use the federal billions for agriculture." Every project must meet sustainability criteria in public procurement. This should be applied much more consistently to direct payments as well. "The drinking water initiative therefore follows a liberal approach," says the National Council. It works through incentives. Waterfalls therefore reject the pesticide initiative, which simply prohibits synthetic pesticides. Two equally large camps Other politicians see waterfall use against pesticides with suspicion. Central National Councillor Stefan Müller-Altermatt says that he is concerned with liberal principles, not ecology. He was basically against subsidies. "Water traps would not be credible if, in the name of ecology, they supported the drinking water initiative." The picture that the FDP is currently giving on environmental issues is confusing. Prominent FDP exponents such as waterfalls are in favour of the drinking water initiative and against the CO2 law, although the party does just the opposite. 40 percent of the national FDP delegates agreed to the drinking water initiative's slogan. The Zuger FDP recommends a yes, the Bernese section has decided to release the vote. In the CO2 law, the young free-minded could not get through to any slogan. Three cantonal parties advise against. The FDP support is split into two practically equal-sized bearings. This is demonstrated by the second SRG trend survey conducted by GfS Bern. 49 percent support the CO2 Act, 48 percent oppose it. The support in the case of the drinking water initiative has even fallen at the FDP base. It's still 25 percent. "For the FDP, environmental policy is always a tightrope," says Lukas Golder, co-director of GfS Bern. If she compromises with the left, she must accept interventionist measures. Even a steering levy leads to more administrative effort and thus to more budgetism. Golder: "On the other hand, environmental and climate issues receive a lot of support from FDP supporters." The party's change of course in environmental policy in 2019 had been supported by three-quarters of the population. Plebiscite about the eco-course Waterfalls speaks out, which disturbs many free-minded people in the CO2 law: more bureaucracy, redistribution, interventionism. That was not liberal. The Decree on the Law consists of 261 articles on 171 pages. Harsch criticizes the Bernese National Council for the ticket tax. These distribute the costs unfairly and even counterproductively, because the transfer passengers from abroad are exempt from the levy. The criticism of the law is also fundamental: "It is not possible to save as much greenhouse gases as possible internationally with a Swiss franc." Waterfalls sees the vote as a plebiscite on the orientation of the FDP in climate and environmental policy. "A no offers the chance to return to the liberal path of virtue," says the National Council. In the 2019 election year, he appealed for more serenity and steadfastness, but one had no longer wanted to listen. Waterfalls learned the plans of the party's top to reorientate from the newspaper. Later he left the Environment Commission and withdrew from climate policy. He's not bitter, says waterfalls. The FDP could be distinguished with truly sustainable solutions. These were also economically feasible without the new CO2 law. This includes Swiss investments in new aircraft or participation in the global CO2 compensation system for aviation (Corsia). Critics argue that Corsia is too lax, because it is merely seeking climate-neutral growth in the aviation industry. For Golder, a crash of the CO2 law would not call into question the free-minded change of course. The presentation was about implementation. The Commission is also proposing that the Member States should be able to take the necessary measures to ensure that the Community's environmental policy is implemented in the same way as the Community's environmental policy. ==References== In liberal milieus, he continues to observe a lot of support for steering charges, says Golder. Moreover, contrary to the general trend between the first and second surveys, the CO2 law on the FDP base had easily gained approval. Christian Wasserfallen resigned from the party presidency in 2019 in protest against the new eco-course of the FDP. Now he's fighting the CO2 law.