Supporters of the CO2 Act claim that Switzerland is particularly affected by climate change. A fact check 2003 was a year with a summer of the century. At that time, mortality was similar to that in the Corona year 2020. What's going on? Christian Speicher A thawing permafrost makes steep mountain slopes unstable, which leads to murmurs. The photo is taken from the Zernez National Park. Joël Hunn / NZZ Fruit farmers fear the late frost like the devil's holy water. When the temperatures drop at night again far below freezing point in April, the delicate flowers of the fruit trees threaten to freeze. But the fruit farmers should not fear the late frost, but rather climate change. It is not so unusual that icy air reaches our latitudes from the Arctic in April. Rather, it is unusual for fruit trees to start blooming earlier because of global warming. This mixture of unpredictable weather and the long-standing climate trend destroyed half of the Swiss fruit harvest in 2017. It brought the fruit farmers a loss of 100 million Swiss francs. Climate change is not an abstract threat to future generations. Its effects are already noticeable today – also in Switzerland. The vote on the revised CO2 law is now due. It sets the framework for a halving of CO2 emissions by 2030. The Federal Council, the Parliament, the cantons and numerous scientists recommend the adoption of the law. They say Switzerland is particularly affected by climate change. But is that true? Two degrees of warming since 1860 The statement is correct, and yet it is only half-right. In fact, temperatures in Switzerland have increased by two degrees since the beginning of industrialization – twice as high as in the global average. Compared to other landlocked countries, however, Switzerland is not a special case, says Stephan Bader of Meteo Switzerland. Country regions generally warmed up more than coastal regions. Because the dampening influence of the oceans, which absorb part of the heat, is lacking. With its warming of two degrees, Switzerland is therefore well integrated into the continental overall picture. Temperature is the most important indicator that the climate in Switzerland is changing. But it is far from the only one. Last year, Bafu and Meteo Switzerland gathered together in a comprehensive report on the causes of climate change and its effects. The authors strictly distinguish between changes that are already noticeable, and those that can be expected due to model calculations up to the middle of the century. A direct consequence of the warming is that heat waves in Switzerland have become more frequent and also more intense since 1901. This increase has a direct impact on health. As Martina Raglettli and Martin Röösli from the Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute showed in an investigation last year, heat waves and individual heat days lead to the need for more and more people to be hospitalised. And mortality is also increasing. According to the authors, there were 975 additional deaths in Switzerland in the record-breaking summer of 2003. This corresponds to an increase of 6.9 percent. In 2003, the number of people killed was as high as in the Corona year 2020. Agriculture, too, suffers from prolonged periods of heat. According to the Federal Office for the Environment (Bafu), economic losses amounted to 500 million Swiss francs in the summer of 2003. Global warming is also changing winters in Switzerland. Thus, since 1961, the number of frost days has fallen by 60 percent. In the same period, the zero-grade limit has moved upwards by 300 to 400 meters. These are changes that did not pass without a trace in an Alpine country like Switzerland, says Bader, one of the co-authors of the climate report. Since 1850, the glaciers in Switzerland have lost more than half of their volume due to the warming. Year after year, about a half to a cubic kilometre of ice was lost, depending on the intensity of the summer heat. It is therefore foreseeable that there will be only a few glaciers on shady slopes by the end of the century. That is not just an aesthetic problem, says Bader. Low precipitation regions such as the Valais consumed in summer from the melting water of the glaciers. The agricultural and energy sectors would therefore have to adjust in time to a new water regime. Climate change affects not only the glaciers. The permafrost in the Swiss mountains also retreats. This is shown by measurements of the Swiss Permafrost measurement network Permos, which spans a period of 20 years. The researchers found that the temperatures measured at 10 and 20 metres depth in 2019/20 have reached or even exceeded the record values from 2015. This can be attributed, among other things, to the high air temperatures as well as to the early snowfall, which prevented the heat stored in the summer from being radiated. As a result, a more powerful layer of permafrost will thaw in the following summer. For the Swiss mountain regions dependent on tourism, the warning signals are. Because the permafrost holds the ground. If the kitt thaws, ice-bearing debris in the high mountains is set in motion and slip to the valley. This increases the danger of mudslides. The operators of mountain railways also have to adapt to a new situation. In future, they will have to monitor regularly whether the thawing underground is still viable enough. In addition, thawing permafrost could lead to more mountain falls and make high alpine hiking trails insecure. The heat summer 2003 provided a foretaste here. At that time, thousands of cubic meters of rock were dissolved on the Hörnligrat. Over 90 climbers had to be rescued by helicopter. The popular climbing route on the Matterhorn remained closed for several days. More rain in winter The fact that climate change can also have positive effects is evident in the winter precipitations. These have increased by 20 to 30 percent since 1864. However, only very high-altitude ski resorts benefit from this. In deep areas, you have to adjust more to rain in winter. The number of snow days below 2000 metres has decreased by 20 percent since 1970, and even by 50 percent under 800 metres. For many pre-alpine ski resorts, this will mean the end sooner or later. Averaged throughout the year, there is no statistically significant increase or decrease in precipitation in Switzerland. Nevertheless, the summers seem to tend to get drier. This can be explained by the evaporation that has increased as temperatures rise, Bader explains. This trend is not yet very pronounced. However, it should be noted that dry summers have accumulated over the last 10 to 15 years. This problem is likely to be accentuated in the coming decades. According to the climate scenarios of the National Centre for Climate Services (NCCS), summer rainfall could decrease by up to 25 percent by the middle of the century, and the longest dry season could last up to nine days longer than today. Extremely dry summers as in 2018 could then accumulate in Switzerland. At that time, the level of rivers and lakes fell to low temperatures. And also the soil was so dry that the grass and grain dried up in the fields. The situation was so critical that some farmers were forced to fly water for their cows to the Alps by helicopter. And hay suddenly became a shortage. Whether the climate trends, which are already observed today, will intensify in the coming decades depends heavily on what measures the international community is taking. If greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise unchecked (which is unlikely), temperatures in Switzerland could rise by another 2 to 3.3 degrees by the middle of the century. With consistent climate protection, it would be 0.7 to 1.9 degrees. With the adoption of the CO2 Act, Switzerland has the power to contribute its part to the halving of greenhouse gas emissions and thus fulfil its commitments made in Paris.