The Greens do most politics in Parliament with Corona An analysis of 1500 speeches by the National and State Councillors Alexandra Kohler «Coronavirus is leading to incredible uncertainty worldwide», «we want to strengthen social cohesion in the crisis», «the Coronavirus is probably to blame for everything» – that is only three out of several thousand speeches in Parliament last year. Since March 2020, Swiss parliamentarians have been debating the Coronavirus and its consequences. The NZZ has examined the parliamentary speeches since the beginning of the Corona crisis. All the debates on the National Council and the Council of State were evaluated and who talked about the virus and the crisis was examined. Since March 2020, the parliamentarians have spoken in seven sessions in the National Council and the Council of States just over 8000 times. In one fifth of all the speeches in Parliament, at least once, «Corona», «Covid», «Sars» or «Coronavirus» occurred, so it was in some way about the virus and the related crisis. Looking at the people, especially SVP politicians and Green politicians have talked about the Coronavirus. At group level, the Greens have most often done policy on the subject of coronavirus. Seven parliamentarians have even mentioned "Corona" or "Covid" in more than half of their contributions. The leader is a jurisprudence The middle-level Jurassic national council, Jean-Paul Gschwind, mentioned Corona and Covid-19 relatively often in his speeches – in eleven out of a total of seventeen speeches. He's a rookie in his party. Jean-Paul Gschwind is a member of the parliamentary finance commission and has talked mostly about finances and flying. Many of his speeches deal with Covid-19 loans, whether for cultural workers, families with children or for rail transport. The Green St. Gall National Councillor Franziska Ryser was the second most pronounced Corona virus. In 21 speeches, she addressed the Coronavirus mainly or at least marginally 13 times. She often spoke about the Covid-19 law, for example in favour of increasing financial aid to Swiss companies and in favour of a broader interpretation of the harshness rule. But Ryser used the Coronavirus and the associated economic problems again and again on other topics, such as cheap rents and cooperative housing. SVP and FDP reluctant The FDP politicians mentioned the Corona crisis relatively rarely in their contributions. In the speeches of the St. Galler FDP National Council Marcel Dobler, the Coronavirus was still the most likely topic. In 2021 Dobler spoke among other things about the Covid-19 Act as well as about short-time work. Some parliamentarians seem to have evaded the pandemic issue – or at least have used it little for their political purposes. Most rarely, the Geneva SVP National Councillor Yves Nidegger mentioned «Corona» or «Covid» in his speeches. Even the St. Galler SVP National Councillor Mike Egger spoke little about the Corona crisis despite 28 speeches. The words «Corona» and «Pandemic» never put Egger in his mouth, «Covid-19» just once. His speeches in Parliament were largely about the CO2 law, but also about the ban on concealment and the framework agreement. By far the most politicized with the topic of Corona have been the Greens. On the one hand, they have expressed themselves on topics directly related to Corona, such as the opening steps, the restrictive measures or short-time work. However, «Corona» and «Covid» often also appear in speeches on other subjects. For example, in June 2020, the National Councillor of the Greens, Christine Badertscher, spoke about Switzerland's international cooperation, and more specifically about limiting the federal loans – the Corona crisis she mentions several times. For the Greens, a platform The Greens have been represented in the National Council with 13.2 percent since the federal elections in 2019, but have no seat in the Federal Council. "It is possible to understand their strong presence at Corona in such a way that they wanted to be profiled and act as a government-capable party," says Bruno Wüest, political scientist and data analyst at Sotomo. "The Greens have tried to remind the public of their lack of representation in the Federal Council in Parliament on the Corona issue." Bruno Wüest says that the FDP is quite different. First of all, it is astonishing that the FDP has made so little reference to Corona – bearing in mind that much has been said about SMEs, the economy and finances in relation to Coronavirus. In only 16.1 percent of the speakers, the FDP is experiencing the Corona crisis, absolutely speaking less than the Greens. Bruno Wüest says, however, that at second glance this gives a sense: "I suspect that the party is behind its two federal councils, Karin Keller-Sutter and Ignazio Cassis, and does not want to criticize them too strongly in Parliament." Because if the FDP politicians had expressed themselves more about Covid-19 loans and restrictive measures, then probably more critical than benevolent. It is also interesting to know what the parliamentarians have spoken about in the Covid-19 texts. Among the 20 most common German and also French words, there are strikingly many words that have to do with finance: «Franken», «francs», «millions», «billions». The restrictive measures to contain the virus were also repeatedly the subject – the word "measures" and the French "mesures" were often mentioned. Many words have an optimistic impact: In the German interventions, "good" and "important" often occurred. Also in the most frequently mentioned French words there are positives rather than negatives, but also words that describe the seriousness of the situation: For example, "bies" (good), "important" (important), "social" (social) and "raison" (reason). In addition to the most frequently mentioned terms, it is also worth looking at the words that occurred relatively more frequently in the Corona word messages than in all the speakers. In German as well as in French, «crisis» and «crise» are the frontrunners. In German, one encounters again many well-known terms about economy and money. The discourse also revolved much around Swiss companies and how they can be compensated or saved: In addition to «credit» and «proposal», the words mentioned relatively often include «short-time work» and «short-time work compensation». Romands Thematize Culture The discourse in French is similar. However, the Romands have talked about other topics related to Corona: culture and rent (locataires, tenants and loyer). Both terms can not be found on the German list. Rarely was the discussion of health and vaccination discussed in the analyses. Bruno Wüest says that the reason for this could be that the Corona Task Force, the Federal Council and the Federal Office of Health will have to discuss health in detail week after week, and the Federal Council and the cantons will have to decide quickly. "The parliamentarians seem to be holding back on the subject of health," says Bruno Wüest. Health was the most important topic in the past spring, summer and spring session 2021.