Without CO2 law, energy-intensive companies have to expect significantly higher costs 1100 companies can now be exempted from the CO2 levy. If the new CO2 law on the urn fails, this derogation expires – with significant consequences for the Swiss plant site. David Vonplon If energy-intensive companies are no longer able to get rid of the CO2 levy, they are threatened with operational tasks and relocations abroad. Goran Basic fuel oil and natural gas are to become more expensive. The CO2 levy on these fossil fuels is expected to rise from 96 francs per tonne to 210 francs. This is what it wants the new CO2 Act, which we will be discussing on 13 May. The vote will take place at the next voting time. The question of who can get rid of the levy is therefore all the more important. Today, about 1100 companies are using this exception rule. They all emit more than 100 tonnes of CO2 per year and thus fulfil the requirement for exemption. In return, these companies must take climate measures in their operations, which reduce emissions. Exemption for all companies In the future, such target agreements, which will last for several years, will be able to conclude all companies, for example bakeries, hotels, restaurants and craft businesses. The extension of the instrument was a crucial reason for some business associations to stand behind the new CO2 law. "Many companies want and can contribute to reducing emissions," says Kurt Lanz, Head of Infrastructure, Energy and Environment at Economiesuisse. The new law would remove barriers to entry thresholds so that as many target agreements as possible would be reached and the expected CO2 savings would be increased. Its association assumes that in the future, significantly more companies will make use of this option and will be exempt from the obligation to pay dues thanks to a target agreement. In total, this could save 50 to 100 percent more CO2, says Lanz. So much is at stake for the economy. This is all the more so because, if the CO2 law fails on the urn, the existing regime for the exemption of CO2 emissions would also lapse. Because this is limited until the end of 2021. And there is no connection solution without the new CO2 law. This would affect those 1100 companies that have already concluded a target agreement with CO2 exemption. These are companies from a wide range of sectors: the metal and machinery industries, plastics processing, glassware and chemical and pharmaceutical products. Greenhouses, vegetable producers, cheese factories, warehouses and automotive suppliers also use the derogation. These companies would have to expect significantly higher costs in the future. According to the Federal Office for the Environment, a total of 290 million Swiss francs were refunded in 2019. Operational tasks and relocations are threatened The Swissmem Association is also strongly warning against the disappearance of existing programmes. In particular, the target agreements with tax exemption are a mandatory framework for the 150 energy-intensive companies, which still makes production in Switzerland possible. "If they fall away, the production location in Switzerland is seriously at risk," says Vice Director Jean-Philippe Kohl. "There would be business tasks and production relocations abroad." But not only the Swiss factory would be among the losers due to the loss of jobs and tax revenues, according to Kohl. Similarly, global efforts to combat climate change would be weakened. For example, companies would hardly have to conclude a target agreement on the use of fossil fuels abroad, in which they commit themselves to reducing CO2 emissions. On request, the Swiss Steel Group, which operates a steel plant in Emmenbrücke, explains that a no to the CO2 law would be problematic. "The elimination of CO2 emissions would result in an enormous increase in costs for our company. Competitiveness would suffer greatly," says CEO Andrea Geile. It estimates that the CO2 dues for the company would result in "a high single-digit million amount" per year. On request, Jacqueline Jakob, Director of the Energy Agency of the Economy (EnAW), stresses that the success model of the target agreements would be jeopardised by a no to the revised CO2 law. Positive dynamics would be slowed down as companies cut more CO2 than originally planned. This is because it is only when the agreements are implemented that the additional potential for responsible use of energy and other natural resources is visible. On behalf of the Federal Government, EnAW takes care of Swiss companies' care of energy and supports them in implementing the legal requirements of the Federal Government and cantons. At present, 100 consultants are working for the Agency on a mandate basis. If the legal basis for the target agreement system is missing, the future of the EnAW and that of the competition organisation Act would be questioned. "We have to reorientate ourselves completely," explains Jacob. Parliament should close the legislative gap The business associations hope that Parliament will create a transitional solution to secure today's practice if the CO2 law fails. Swissmem Vice-Director Jean-Philippe Kohl says: "An abrupt elimination of this highly effective instrument in terms of climate policy would be a breach of confidence." This also applies not least to the enormous administrative burden that the companies that have actively taken climate action in recent years would have to face. Parliament had already called for a one-year extension of the limited-term instruments in the CO2 Act in December 2019, after the revision of the CO2 Act had failed in its first attempt. This also included the target agreement system with the exemption of taxes. However, it refused to continue beyond 2021. It is, however, questionable whether Parliament would be able to impose an extension of tax exemption within a period of only half a year if the CO2 Act fails. If it did not succeed in closing the legal gap in time, a longer period of uncertainty would threaten, says Kurt Lanz of Economiesuisse. This would not only put the companies concerned in a difficult situation. The economy's efforts to reduce greenhouse gases as a whole would also be significantly reduced.