Majorities in agricultural initiatives are overturned – for the CO2 law it is close Three weeks before the referendum of 13 July. The agricultural initiatives lost their narrow lead in June: a no is emerging. The CO2 law is surprisingly tight. Thomas Schürp In the country, the no to the agricultural initiatives is clear. Peter Klaunzer / Keystone For the two agricultural initiatives, a tangible no-trend emerges. The second SRG trend survey (by GfS) published on Wednesday, as well as the most recent opinion poll of "20 minutes" and the Tamedia newspapers, also published on Wednesday, state this. As often with initiatives, the votes voted in favour increasingly moved to 'no'. ==References== According to the SRG survey, the voters had rejected the popular initiative "for clean drinking water and healthy food" by 53 percent. 44 percent of respondents agree. Three percent are still in the draw. According to the Tamedia surveys, even 57 percent of respondents would reject the initiative; only 41 percent would agree. The surveys show a clear city-country grave. However, approval is much smaller even in large agglomerations. Politically, the situation is rather clear: supporters of left-wing parties and the GLP are mostly in favour of the initiative, sympathizers of other parties and non-partisans are majority opposed. The main argument of the opponents is the fear that restrictions lead to more imported environmental damage. They also see the initiative as an existential threat to agriculture. The decline in the previous yes trend in the pesticide initiative is also clear. According to the SRG survey, the popular initiative "for a Switzerland without synthetic pesticides" would have been rejected at 51 percent at the end of May. 47 percent were in favour and 2 percent were indecisive. In the Tamedia survey, the no-trend is even clearer: 42 percent of respondents voted in favour and 57 percent against the initiative, while 1 percent did not say they wanted to vote. With the CO2 Act it will be just as surprisingly scarce the result could be with the CO2 Act. Compared to the first SRG survey, the voter's Yes share has fallen by 6 percentage points to 54 percent. 43 percent want to reject the law, 3 percent are still undecided. In the 20 minutes/Tamedia survey, the vote was only 53 percent, 46 percent of respondents said no, 1 percent was undecided. The no is particularly pronounced in rural areas as well as in deep to middle-sized social strata. Only the voters of the SVP are clearly opposed to the law. Their rejection even increased compared to the end of April. In the left-wing party-political spectrum up to the GLP - despite the no of a part of the climate strike movement - the high agreement is maintained. However, it has been broken off with party-independents who are new majority against the CO2 law. Voters in the middle have increased their vote. However, a majority of the FDP base – unlike their party – continues to say no. Even in the FDP, the proponents' camp is growing: after an increase of 5 percentage points, it now comes to 41 percent. The CO? law has won approval from the boys. In the meantime, 50 percent of 18-34-year-olds say yes; in the second wave of the survey, it was only 45 percent. The support of the middle-aged voters is rather scarce. Clear yes for Covid-19 law The Covid-19 law, which was opposed by the referendum, shows a clear agreement with the 64 percent bill. 32 percent said they were against it, and 4 percent were in a draw. At 20 minutes/Tamedia, the yes is 69 percent and the no is 29 percent. 2 percent did not provide any information. The rejection of SVP supporters and generally government-critical persons is particularly clear. Even if all age groups are for submission, approval increases significantly with the age of the respondents. Sattes Ja in the Terrorism Act A comfortable majority of 62 percent would have been on 22 July, according to the SRG survey. ==References====External links== 32 percent were against it, 6 percent were still undecided. At 20 minutes/Tamedia, the vote was 63 percent, 34 percent said no, 3 percent were draw. This template allowed the no-camp to expand over the entire campaign period. Nevertheless, the trend should not be enough to tilt the result. In the second wave of the SRG-SSR trend survey for the vote of 13 July, the SRG-SSR was re-elected. On June 18, the research institute gfs.bern asked about the SRG between the 18th and 26th centuries. ==References====External links== The third wave of the 20 minute Tamedia survey is based on 17 193 responses from participants. The survey was held on 27 and 28 April. ==References==