The new CO2 law brings a redistribution machine for 2.5 billion Swiss francs per year The Federal Council's draft regulation on the CO2 law presented on Wednesday brings a roadmap for increases in taxes. In 2024, CO2 emissions could rise from 96 francs to 140 francs per tonne. Hansueli Schöchli In 2019, greenhouse gas emissions in Switzerland were around 14 percent lower than in 1990. According to the Federal authorities, Switzerland is thus likely to miss the stage target for 2020 (minus 20 percent). In 2030, greenhouse gas emissions are expected to be at most half as high as in 1990. The backwardness of the march table provides a tailwind for the supporters of the revision of the CO2 law, which comes before the people in June. The proposal contains three main elements: additional environmental taxes, stricter regulations for buildings and vehicles, and an extension of subsidies via the "Climate Fund". Roadmap for steering levy The law adopted by Parliament provides the basic values, but leaves many things open in concrete terms. On Wednesday the Federal Council sent the draft implementing regulation to the consultation. This provides more detailed information on a permanent policy issue: who pays how much, and who gets how much? According to the current CO2 law, CO2 emissions on fossil fuels (especially fuel oil, natural gas and coal) may not exceed CHF 120 per tonne of CO2. At the current levy of 96 francs, this maximum is not exhausted. However, because significantly higher taxes on the targeting of climate targets are expected soon, the legislative revision includes an increase in the maximum to 210 francs per tonne. In its draft regulation, the Federal Council now announces concrete increases in CO2 emissions depending on the development of fuel emissions. At the beginning of 2024, CO2 emissions are expected to rise to 140 or 145 Swiss francs if fuel emissions in 2022 exceed 60 percent of 1990 emissions. By comparison, in 2019, emissions of fuels in Switzerland amounted to around 70 percent of 1990. A significant increase in the levy to 2024 is therefore possible from today's point of view. The draft regulation contains further increases to the beginning of 2026, 2028 and 2030. For example, the 2030 CO2 levy is expected to rise to the new maximum of 210 Swiss francs, if the emissions from fuels are more than 42 percent of the 1990 level two years earlier. The law also provides for a new flight billet for flights from Switzerland from 30 to 120 francs per flight. The draft regulation also says more precisely about this. For short-haul flights (large: flights to Western and Central Europe) the cheapest booking class is a charge of CHF 30 per flight, in the more expensive booking classes it is CHF 60. For medium-haul flights (big: Eastern Europe, Middle East and North Africa), the charge is 60 or more. 90 francs. It is the most common of the two. 120 francs. In addition, the draft regulation clarifies the planned levy on flights departing from Switzerland from commercial and private jets. Depending on the weight of the aircraft and travel distance, this tax amounts to CHF 500 to CHF 3000 per flight. Honeypot not yet distributed The distribution of funds from environmental levies is also of great interest to those concerned. The CO2 levy at present level and the new aviation charges are estimated to total around 2.5 billion Swiss francs per year for air traffic without a pandemic brake. Of this, about 1.2 billion could flow back to the population via deduction from the health insurance bill – about 140 francs per capita. Some 350 to 400 million Swiss francs are expected to flow back to the companies via AHV compensation funds – probably in the order of 60 to 100 Swiss francs per 100 000 Swiss francs. The Federal Council mixes climate policy with social policy. According to the draft regulation, only wage components up to the maximum insurable amount are to apply to the determining wage sum in accordance with the accident insurance law; this year this maximum is 148 200 Swiss francs annual wage. With this limitation, the Federal Council wants to achieve a hidden redistribution of high-wage industries into low-wage industries. The feast for lobbyists is increasing, especially in the case of those parts of environmental taxes that are not directly distributed back to the population and businesses. This remaining item is happy and, according to the federal estimate, is expected to make up about 1 billion Swiss francs per year without pandemic brake. The law mentions various uses for this money. This includes the already ongoing programme for energy-efficient building renovations plus further measures regarding buildings (maximum CHF 450 million). In addition, the law generally allows subsidies for activities that contribute to the achievement of climate targets. The draft regulation makes some clarifications, but leaves much to be done to distribute subsidy funds among the various activities. In a transitional phase until 2024, the Federal Council will set annual cost roofs for perhaps five to ten subgroups – for example for innovation projects in Germany, projects abroad, emission reductions in air transport and loan guarantees for technology promotion. These figures then flow into the federal budget for the following year. The Federal Council is expected to decide the cost roofs for the first year around the beginning of June.