Swiss indulgence trading in climate protection? The new CO2 Act allows for the saving of emissions abroad – this is due to Christoph Eisenring's criticism It doesn't matter for the climate where greenhouse gases are saved in the world. Human-induced global warming is a global challenge. In order to get as much climate protection as possible for your money, you should reduce CO2 where it is best. A global emissions trading scheme or a world-wide rise in the price of greenhouse gas would provide the right incentives. But the world community is far from that. Nevertheless, we should not abandon the search for favourable measures to reduce emissions. This is particularly true for Switzerland, where saving CO2 is comparatively expensive. In the Paris Agreement, it committed itself to halving its greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared with 1990. ==References====External links== The Commission is proposing that a quarter of the promised savings be made abroad. This is sharply criticised by parts of the climate youth. On the one hand, Switzerland is not taking responsibility for global emissions. Only one tonne of CO2 saved domestically is therefore considered to be good. However, it should be crucial that decarbonisation is approached with the lowest possible cost. Secondly, foreign compensation programmes would not work, they say. Preventing double counting A certain scepticism about foreign programs is understandable for two reasons: First, projects in the past often fell ill because the state there claimed the reduction for itself and the buyer from an industrial country did the same. With bilateral agreements, Switzerland is now ensuring that this is not happening. The first agreements with Peru and Ghana were concluded, and a declaration of intent was reached with Senegal. It helps that in the Paris Agreement (almost) each country has announced its own reduction target and must be measured by it. Secondly, such compensation projects have often not brought any additional savings. Jürg Füssler from the consulting firm Infras has evaluated the experience. 85% of the projects showed only a small probability that they actually reduced CO2 in addition to what the country had planned anyway. Only 2% of the projects could be said with great certainty. Füssler says that the payment from a western country was often simply the icing on the cake for a project that had already been carried out. Many projects on wind or hydroelectric power plants, for example, had shown this design defect. Switzerland is therefore very strict in which projects from abroad can be counted at all. Firstly, there must be an agreement with the country concerned. Secondly, because of the high take-over effects, it must not be wind or solar power plants. Thirdly, forest projects are also excluded, as they are often difficult to monitor. Then certain environmental and social standards must be met. These guardrails do not make the work of the Foundation Climate Protection and CO2 Compensation (Klik) easy. It has the task of compensating Swiss oil companies for the emissions of some of the imported fossil fuels. Projects in Germany and new abroad serve this purpose. Mischa Classen, who is responsible for foreign business at Klik, explains that the projects should not only offer a favourable opportunity to reduce CO2. It is equally important that they improve the lives of people in partner countries. In the Peruvian Andes, for example, cooking ovens are to be distributed to thousands of households. Not only do they need about 40% less wood than conventional fireplaces, they also drain the smoke, which benefits health. Credit guarantees are also being discussed for companies that want to increase their energy efficiency and need bank loans. Another focus is the management of waste dumps, in which the strong greenhouse gas methane is produced. This is used for electricity generation. The certainty here is great that the greenhouse gas will be further reduced, as the countries have neither the technical nor the financial resources for such measures. By 2030, 30 to 35 million will be spent abroad. CO2 emissions. However, in order to be able to track enough projects in the next few years, Klik is dependent on the Federal Office for the Environment to establish bilateral agreements with various states. The environmental ambassador Franz Perrez is responsible for this. He is confident that he will have concluded agreements with five to ten countries by the end of 2022. Four people in the Federal Office are currently engaged in negotiations. He believes that the strict requirements for projects are necessary to bring about real reductions and to ensure the protection of the environment and human rights. Of course, high requirements on the projects do not make emission reductions cheaper. Estimates of between 30 and 35 Fr. per tonne of CO2 saved. In the free market, certificates cost a tenth of it, says Classen. However, compensation in Switzerland is still significantly more expensive with project costs of often 100 to 150 Fr. per tonne saved. How does Switzerland maintain the motivation of the partner countries to pursue ambitious climate goals when buying them CO2 savings? The respective countries themselves would have to implement the measures that they could achieve, says Perrez. The emission reductions that can be calculated for Switzerland would therefore focus on more demanding areas. A partner country will also not agree to a project that would have been implemented anyway, he explains. It should be possible to calculate the emissions that reduce Switzerland and prevent them from improving the Swiss balance sheet. In addition, the Klik Foundation is engaged in a project for a maximum of five to seven years. Thus, Switzerland can only count on CO2 reduction for a few years. The projects then go back to the country. If it continues, it will now improve its climate balance. International division of labour A study has estimated savings if all countries are expected to acquire certificates abroad to meet their Paris 2030 targets. If this were used consistently, costs could almost halve to 250 billion. $. For Perrez, Switzerland is primarily given time with its foreign projects. They were a good instrument for the next ten to twenty years. However, if, under the Paris Agreement, all countries had to gradually tighten their targets from 2030 onwards and go towards net zero, there would be less and less room for compensation. But this is for the time being future music. The CO2 Act certainly has questionable parts such as the Climate Fund, which is to distribute subsidies in Switzerland. And for fuels, inclusion in emissions trading would be obvious from an economic point of view. With the possibility to reduce CO2 and allow the reduction to be calculated abroad, one tries nevertheless to use the international division of labour also in climate protection. That is why the instrument deserves a chance.