The Mart of the Broken Rural Population The CO2 Act brings many benefits to the inhabitants of rural areas – urban residents are more burdened David Vonplon Flying, gasoline and heating with oil and gas: this is to become more expensive in the future. In order to halve greenhouse gas emissions in Switzerland by 2030 compared to 1990 levels, new environmental taxes and fuel surcharges will be introduced. This is what it wants the new CO2 Act, which we will be discussing on 13 May. The vote will take place at the next voting time. In France, parts of the rural population have gone to the barricades because of a CO2 tax on petrol. In Switzerland, however, the additional costs for the population should be manageable according to the Minister of the Environment Simonetta Sommaruga. A family of four, who fly on holiday once a year within Europe, drive a petrol car and heat with oil, will receive additional costs of an average of 100 francs per year by 2030, the Federal Councillor recently said in an interview with this newspaper. If you don't heat up with oil, switch to an electric car or don't fly for a year, pay less or nothing at all. For opponents of the law is "pure colouring". Last week, the Solothurn SVP National Councillor Christian Imark declared that the extra burden for a family was many times higher. And: The law is unfair, because the rural population is being snarled above all. Reliant on the car Unlike the city dwellers, who would have shopping opportunities in walking distance and otherwise could easily move on the city area by public transport, there is no dense public transport network available in the outskirts and mountain areas. The local population is therefore dependent on the car. In addition, according to Imark, the living spaces presented by Sommaruga lead the population astray. In a single-family house in the countryside, the living space is usually larger, which means significantly higher fuel oil costs for many households. "The bottom line is that this is an increase of around 600 to 900 francs per family," says the Solothurn SVP man. But is it really true that the CO2 Act is used to protect the climate on the back of the plagued rural and mountain population? It is true that the inhabitants of less developed areas and peripheral regions do not only have a car more often. They also travel more kilometers by car. For example, daily distances in motorised individual transport in rural areas are on average about 50 percent higher than in urban agglomerations. The former are about 30 kilometers a day, the latter 20 kilometers. This is evident from the microcensus, which examines the traffic behaviour of the Swiss population every five years. The rural population is thus in fact more likely to be affected by the surcharges on fuels provided for in the CO2 Act. But how much do they weigh? The price increases on petrol and diesel are not a CO2 levy. Rather, fuel importers can finance their measures to compensate for the emissions of petrol and diesel with the revenues from the price increases – if they want to. However, this is unclear and depends on the competitive situation and margins. For example, higher prices in the fuel industry could destroy the business from fuel tourism. Currently, the maximum surcharge is 5 centimetres per litre. In fact, only 1.5 rags per litre are used up. If the fuel industry makes use of the possibility to charge the surcharge of 12 rappen, this will lead to an additional annual cost of about CHF 180 for the holders of a vehicle with an average fuel consumption of 25 000 kilometres. According to the federal government, however, a maximum surcharge of 12 rappen can only be expected towards the end of the 2020s. The expected surcharge on petrol is therefore smaller than the price fluctuations in recent months. In November 2020, the litre of lead-free cost an average of CHF 39. In February 2021 the price was already CHF 54. More oil and gas heaters But what about the SVP's argument that the rural population needs to cover more taxes on fuel oil? According to a survey by the real estate company Wüest Partner, the average demand for living space is 53 square meters per person throughout Switzerland. Notable differences in the city-country comparison do not appear. Only in the rich, low-tax communities in the countryside and in the agglomeration belt around the cities is the living space slightly larger than in the cities. More decisive for answering the question of how much the higher CO2 dues on fuel oil and gas are burdening rural areas is the proportion of fossil-free heating. And here, the mountain and peripheral regions have a clear head over the urban regions. For example, in Valais and Graubünden, 53 percent of households are already fossil-free, and in Appenzell Innerrhoden 56 percent. In Obwalden and Uri, 60 percent of households do not use oil and gas, mainly due to the strong spread of wood heating. In contrast, oil and gas are much more frequently used in the densely populated cantons of the central region: in Zurich, the proportion of fossil-free heating is only 29 percent, in Geneva, only 13 percent. In concrete terms, this means that the majority of households in the above-mentioned rural cantons do not have to pay CO2 levies. Instead, they benefit from the redistribution of the steering levies: According to the Federal Office for the Environment (Bafu), a family of four who do not heat with oil or natural gas will receive 428 francs from the CO2 levy per year. Cityrs fly more frequently Also in terms of air ticketing, the population in mountain and peripheral regions is improved with the CO2 Act compared to city dwellers. In urban agglomerations, the inhabitants are not only significantly more on the plane, they also travel further distances, as the statistical data in the microcensus show. Thus, the average number of air travel per person per year in urban centres is 30 percent higher than in rural areas, where residents travel by plane on average only about every two years. This is also noticeable in the wallet: once you fly, you will receive a new 30 francs at the end of the year, and you will receive 60 francs if you do not fly. The low-flyers also benefit from the income from the taxes that foreign tourists pay when they fly home. However, most of the airline tax is paid by those 10 percent of the population who are frequent flyers. Interest groups from peripheral and mountainous regions do not agree with the Lamento of the SVP either. "Although the CO2 law does not create enthusiasm for us," says Thomas Egger, Director of the Swiss Working Group for Mountain Areas (SAB), "we support it." The Valaisese stresses that in the parliamentary consultation it was a central concern of the SAB that the mountain areas would not be further disadvantaged by new climate protection measures. Discrimination would have been the introduction of a CO2 levy on fuels. "We were able to prevent such a levy," says Egger. He considers the foreseeable increase in fuel prices due to the obligation to compensate importers to be manageable. Profiting from the Climate Fund The CO2 law in the sense of rural Switzerland has also been improved in other respects. With the newly established climate fund, the federal government provides funds for measures to address the consequences of climate change. In future, municipalities will be able to receive funds from the fund to protect themselves against natural hazards. Sustainable tourism and energy projects will also be financially supported. This is crucial for mountain areas, says Egger. Finally, they are particularly affected by climate change: not only does climate change increase the risk of natural hazards such as floods, creeks and mountain falls. Snow poverty also endangers winter tourism and threatens hydroelectric power production losses. The bottom line would be that the benefits of the law for mountain and land cantons outweigh the benefits.