The climate youth is back. Less nice, but with a plan. Where's her fight going? How radical can a protest movement be before it harms itself? The climate activists are facing a disintegration test. Michael Schilliger, Flurin Clalüna, Text; Christoph Ruckstuhl, Simon Tanner, Bilder Jo Lang listens to his neighbours. Not always and not intentionally, but his bedroom window goes out onto the garden. And every now and then he hears them talk there, until late into the night. He doesn't understand everything they say, he really doesn't want to listen, but he likes what he understands. Lang was one of Switzerland's most prominent green politicians. Today he lives in Bern in a quiet neighborhood in a red brick house. It is perhaps the most political house in the city. On the upper floor a young couple, climate activists, lives with the Young Greens, he with the Juso. Lang and his partner are at home on the ground floor. A staircase connects not only two floors, but also forty years of protest history. In the garden, Lang's neighbor meets with other activists from the climate youth and discuss dreams, plans, strategies. In front of the Corona pandemic, Lang sometimes sat down and talked. Since then, he's been keeping a little distance. Lang, 67, is sitting in his conservatory on a day of April when he talks about it. He admires these boys. Lang also sat for nights with other people in kitchens, living rooms and gardens. Discussed what to do, what to do to make the world a better place. Lang is a 68, he fought the army and the nuclear power plant. He knows the excitement, euphoria and despair of resistance. Jo Lang has been thinking a lot about the boys in his garden. In the beginning, he says, "the climate movement went like butter through society." He's impressed with what she did. But Lang also knows that the boys see it differently. What they have achieved seems to them to be as effective as a headache pill for cancer. It should have been more possible. Then Corona came and put her to sleep. Now the climate movement is at a crossroads. Jo Lang knows the rhythm of protest waves. They're coming up, and eventually they're breaking. After that calm follows, but wave valleys are deceptive. Is the water just still, because the next wave is already developing sog again and thus smoothing the surface? Jo Lang was once part of a movement where an eco-terrorist named Marco Camenisch blew up high-voltage lines. Camenisch sat in prison after that, Lang as a national councillor in the federal house. This is the future of many in protest movements: some radicalize, others try to change the system from within. And some just give up. The power of the climate movement has been derived from the fact that it has endured these tensions in the two and a half years of its existence. Jo Lang hopes it will stay that way. He says, "I see myself in them, in this boy." Perhaps some also see themselves in him. And others in Marco Camenisch? Where is this movement headed, now that it is trying to resume its drive? The "Strike for Future", a first national protest day, should call it back to people's consciousness today. New players have joined forces to increase the tension. How long does the movement last? How long will she be able to swallow the disappointment of being just a headache pill? And has it reached the point where it is in danger of harming its own cause? In the headquarters In a room in Zurich's west, in the midst of glittering skyscrapers, where revolution would not be sought, three young people sit at a large table. They refer to themselves as the first and second generation of the climate youth – "it sounds like the RAF," one objectes. And you don't want to remember left-wing terrorists under any circumstances. The three climate activists are young, but they are not beginners. You've been interviewing a lot. I'm about to see TV for a report. They know they need the media, right now, after the protests about Corona had to be interrupted for so long. In the background, they continued to work, enlarged the network, forged plans. Even if it has become quiet around them: There is no rest in them. They are impatient – and they are afraid. "When I think of 2050? 240 million climate refugees coming to us. Resource war, a higher sea level. Millions of people will die." There is no exclamation mark in this quote. Anna Lindermeier always talks quietly, even if she's angry and scared. It is not clear whether she is doing this out of shyness or on purpose, because then you listen better. Her face doesn't make it clear, she has a girl face that can still be anything, sometimes it looks like a poker face. Anna Lindermeier: "We have to think about how we define violence." Christoph Ruckstuhl / NZZ Lindermeier, 19, a biology student, has only been active in the climate movement for a year. In the meantime, there is hardly anything else in her life. Lindermeier jumps back and forth between worlds. When she demonstrated for the first time, she was still a gymnasium student, climbed the post car every morning in homes at Albis in the Säuliamt, drove into the city to Kanti Wiedikon, «a hippie canti», many were left and alternative. It was different in the country. Lindermeier grew up in London, his father is a banker, and for the trip to the grandparents in Germany they used to take the plane. She hasn't flown for almost ten years, but she wouldn't judge anyone for flying. "Everyone has to decide this for themselves." For a long time, foreign groups were not welcome at the climate demos. This has also changed because of Lindermeier. Last autumn, the climate movement invited trade unions and NGOs to its headquarters in Zurich for the first time. The fraternization and syllabus were decided, vowed to fight together. A common struggle, because the ecological and social question could not be separated. When Lindermeier talks about this meeting, her voice becomes a little louder, she smiles and seems happy. But just for a second. There's no reason for euphoria. Lindermeier weaves the web of motion more densely. Not just with the unions, she's spinning the strings on the country. Lindermeier founded one of the 156 local groups of the climate movement in her home village Hausen am Albis. Hausen is located ennet the Albispass, only 15 kilometers away from Zurich, but it is another world, public transport country, governed by SVP and FDP. At least twenty people came to the first meeting, and the second was seven. It is simple basic work that Lindermeier is doing here: she negotiated with the village policeman whether the small group on a public place on the national strike day is allowed to carry out a "climate alarm", i.e. produce as much noise as possible with cooking spoons and lids to shake people up. Too short notice, the policeman said. This is the dilemma of the resistors: the young people have been discussing for a long time whether they are not too harmless. Lindermeier and two other activists at their headquarters in Zurich also addressed this question. One said: "We have this joke: eight million Swiss people are demonstrating in the Bundesplatz, but we have no demand. What good is it if we all reach, but demand nothing?" "We die in insolence," answered another. And one of them added: "Violence is only okay against objects to sabotage a coal excavator, that's almost mandatory." Lindermeier said: "We have to think about how we define violence. One has to see: It is perfectly allowed that any cement companies in Africa produce and the whole village has cancer there." It is a moment when it becomes visible what the young people do not really want to show: a kind of cold anger. She's pushing the movement. But where? A girl and Roger Federer It was only a girl with a cardboard plate who sat in front of the Swedish government's seat on the first day of school after the holidays; four months later, in December 2018, 500 students of cantonal schools were on strike in Zurich, and more and more were on strike throughout Switzerland, 20 000, 40 000, and in October 2019 nearly 100,000 young people were reported to have gone out on the streets. All because of this Greta and the climate. The mobilization impressed and confused the adults. The movement is still hard to grasp. On the one hand, there are the peaceful climate strikes. On the other hand, activists already occupied a CS branch in Lausanne as a tennis player in November 2018. Occupying a bank in Switzerland – how much more symbolic can you demonstrate? The Renens District Court released the activists from the charge of breaking house peace, and the case now lies with the Federal Court. But didn't even Roger Federer say "respect and admiration" for the climate youth at the time? Federer, of all people, who is so careful not to conjure up politics that he can be taken as a seismographer for the Swiss average citizen. Of course, it's a protest movement. She can and must not remain harmless. Activists occupy the Federal Square in Bern, in Western Switzerland they build a "ZAD", a "zone à defensivee", a protection zone on the Mormont hill, to defend the hill from the cement company Holcim. An activist puts a video on Instagram. "We never said that we were nonviolent," he says, calling for sabotage files, for "aggressive responses." Not everyone in the movement was happy with this statement. A first test: Would Roger Federer also respect and admire the squatters of a hill who aggressively defend it? Do you even want the admiration of the average Swiss citizen, who has closed his eyes to climate change for decades? It was just a girl with a cardboard plate. Then they became more and more. But if you suddenly have influence, a common goal is no longer enough: How exactly do you change the world? In the system or outside the system? ==References== May Two hours before the anger is discharged, Anna Lindermeier puts a few beige flyers on a folding table and looks around. Nobody's here yet, it's cold and grey on this one. The wind will take more flyers with it than passers-by, the Lindermeier actually for the strike day on 21 May. May would have wanted to mobilize. The Unia trade union has built a tent, scattered wood chips and placed an oversized table on it, demanding on a banner: «Back to the negotiating table, Schreinermeisterverband!» Later they will all stand against the wall from which one looks at the old town, and hammers and fists rise, a sign for the carpenters whose overall work contract has not been renewed. Anna Lindermeier will also raise her fist, make noise. The fight for the climate is for them a struggle for a more just society, another system. An ecological world can also be cruel. Shortly after 11 a.m., the party's prominent march on the Lindenhof, SP President Cédric Wermuth and SP National Councillor Jacqueline Badran are approaching the trade union tent. Wermuth is immediately pulled to the tent, Badran initially stays away, then sees the folding table of the climate strike behind which Lindermeier is standing, approaches, stops at a distance of two meters. She looks at the table and says more to herself than anyone else: "Forty years ago, we should have done it forty years ago. Jänu. If almost Greenpeace had founded back then, it was actually a shame that we didn't do anything.» After a short break, she says. "Jä nu, after all, you're doing something now." Lindermeier stands behind the table, two climate strikers have sided with her, but nobody comments on the words of Badran, this political star of the left. Then Badran closes two steps onto the table and points with an outstretched finger at Lindermeier. "But do you know what I really think is shit? That you don't fight for the CO2 law. I think that's right, really shit. Forty years I fought for it. Forty years of work. It's just.......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... "We also had intensive discussions about this," says Lindermeier. That's all she says, Badran runs away from the table, away from a possible discussion. She knows there's nothing to win here for both sides. Badran is a believer, but she fights like the green politician Jo Lang within the system. It is trying to achieve in Parliament what could not be achieved by the struggle on the streets in its youth. But there are rarely clear victories in Parliament. Most of the time, compromises are reached, like the CO2 Act. The CO2 Act aims to halve Switzerland's greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared to 1990. Of course, the left and the Greens wanted more, but the opposite side wanted less. Switzerland will vote in June. For Anna Lindermeier, the CO2 law is one of the biggest disappointments of her struggle, a symbol of the failure of institutional politics: "We had such an extreme left-green slide after the elections in 2019, and yet not much has changed." She wants the country to be completely climate neutral in 2030. In German-speaking Switzerland, the climate movement does not support the law. She's not fighting it either. It abstains from one of the most important environmental votes in recent history. This is different in Western Switzerland. There the movement is more radical. In the West, they are more repulsive Lausanne Steven Tamburini does not like compromises. Tamburini is a man of principle. It is a challenge for the climate movement. He is a problem for the Greens and the SP. Steven Tamburini: «We must overcome capitalism.» Christoph Ruckstuhl / NZZ Tamburini is the face of the climate movement of Romandy. Because of him, she is also fighting the CO2 law in Western Switzerland. It is «totally insufficient». Tamburini, side by side with the SVP and the oil lobby, promotes a no. He's buying this. In the camp of the proponents the bankers' association and Economiesuisse stand, he also mistrusts them. Tamburini, aged 27 years, sits on the terrace of a vegetarian restaurant at the train station in Lausanne in early May. He's been in the climate movement for a long time. It's not enough for him to ride a bike, not to fly or eat meat anymore. He interrupted his studies to be there only for the movement and to think it over. Everything is connected with everything, the exploitation of the global South with the exploitation of nature, the exploitation of workers with the exploitation of women. In the end, most people who make money are to blame. Actually, Tamburini wanted to be a tennis player, he was talented, but the money was missing for a lot of training. The social question has politicized him, at times he did three jobs besides studying history. If you can't blame the full-time activist Tamburini for something, it's that he's one of the better-off young people who can afford to worry about the future of the world, because yours doesn't have to worry about it. Tamburini is an educational ascender, he comes from an unpolitical parental home. The father of Italians, the mother of Spanish, the whole family was not allowed to vote until five years ago because she was not a naturalized woman. The parents were guests in Switzerland, Tamburini is not enough. He wants to shape the country and, above all, to change it. In the Corona year Tamburini has thought a lot. He says: "Perhaps the people have forgotten us. But we're still here. And we have solutions." These are solutions, some of which sound like yesterday, but which are intended for tomorrow. "We have to overcome capitalism," he says, "we question the logic of the system and understand the reasons behind the climate crisis much better today." Tamburini is a union member and at SolidaritéS, a party that is active in Romandy. Besides the PdA, it is considered the most leftist party in Switzerland, feminist, anti-capitalist, eco-socialist. Tamburini's demands are radical. Can you win majorities like that? "No," he says, "not in parliaments." He works towards a popular uprising, a general strike, perhaps in two or three years. "If Switzerland stands still for a few days, because people are tired of it, something happens. Then we can speak again of majorities," he says. Tamburini doesn't just want a greener world. He wants a different world. Those who should be close to him shake their heads. Daniel Brélaz breathes violently. He's standing in front of the federal house in Berne and he's angry. Brélaz, 71, was Switzerland's first green national council, he was the city president of Lausanne and will resign from parliament next March after twenty years. Brélaz was a pragmatist, mathematician and realo all his life. He was always critical of street protests, although he shared their concerns, not radicalism. Big crowds are creepy to him. In the seventies, Brélaz was an anti-nuclear activist, but he doesn't think anything about revolutions. They scared people, "and they end up bloody in most cases." Almost fifty years and another human image lie between Tamburini and Brélaz. When Tamburini drives the people ahead, Brélaz leads them gently. He says that the climate movement in the novel is captured and ideologized by Tamburini's SolidartéS. "In some cantons of French-speaking Switzerland, the extreme left has succeeded in undermining the climate strike." He considers that the movement in the Romandy is fighting the CO2 law to be grotesque. Brélaz, the fear that the movement is losing goodwill among the population, can be seen in the comments among newspaper articles that have recently appeared on the climate youth. She should go to work, she «stranges» and paint the end of the world on the wall, standing there. This does not do her justice, but it seems that something is changing in the perception of the movement. Parliament and betrayal Laurin Hoppler remembers today how he was on the evening of the 2nd. He was in front of the wardrobe on February 12, and thought about what to wear the next day. It was the evening before his first big appearance at the Grosse Rat in Basel. Hoppler, 20 years old, is the youngest Grand Councillor in the history of the canton. Last autumn, he was elected to parliament for the Young Green Alliance. Hoppler, like Lang and Badran, started the walk through the institutions. For the climate youth, it is something completely new that he tries out: to change the system from within. Previously, Hoppler was the voice of the Basel climate movement for a long time, he organized demonstrations and occupied the barracks of Basel. So now he's sitting where all those who haven't done enough for the climate in his eyes were sitting. Laurin Hoppler: "I'm not in favour of breaking the political system." Christoph Ruckstuhl / NZZ Hoppler says that he doesn't know exactly whether he can still call himself a climate activist. When Hoppler was standing in front of the wardrobe, it was not about fashion, it was about a big question: How much does he want to be taken over by the system? Or even challenge it with its appearance? In the end, he chose a turtleneck sweater, blue pants and white sneakers. A compromise, no provocation, but also no incitement. He didn't go to the barber either. He had thought it over. He put the unruly hair under a hat. ==References== The cameras arrived on February 12. Hoppler was sitting at the kitchen table in his kitchen and was picked up by a television team from Tele Basel. It accompanied him in the tram through the rain, to the council room. There he gave his first speech. At 9 a.m., the transformation of Hoppler was complete. He was now a politician and said: "In beautiful Basel there are five bridges connecting the large and the small bases. I hope that we will build a bridge to a climate-friendly future in time, but also that we will build new bridges for Basel in this room." Half a year later, Hoppler sits at a table at the café "Spring" in Basel and tells how after the inaugural speech an SVP politician came to him and congratulated him. Hoppler was happy. "I was the one who said from the outset in the climate strike: we must try to overcome this crisis through the parliamentary way. I am not in favour of breaking up and rebuilding the political system. I am critical of capitalism, but not necessarily anti-capitalist.» Hoppler feels reservations of the movement about his path, no open hostility, "but there are always people who see you as a traitor". Tony, the optimist When Professor Anthony, in short: Tony, Patt in Russikon in the Zurich Oberland climbs his bike, he has 21 kilometers ahead of him until he descends again before ETH Zurich and enters his office. It's 21 kilometers, and Patt's actually already worked on it. Because Patt is counting on the 21 kilometers. Sometimes he says aloud: One. Two. Three. He rarely had to count on it. At least until three years ago. "It's changing," says Patt today. "I'm counting more and more. Sometimes it's ten. Or fifteen." Patt means electric cars. Of course, they are not a precise measurement value, it is rather a thumb-in-the-wind hold, but for Patt they confirm other more scientific indicators that have transformed him, the professor of climate protection and adaptation: from pessimist to optimist. Patt worked on the fifth report of the World Climate Change Council, which warned against climate change with such drastic words as never before. This report is based on the fear of the climate youth. The scenarios of a world in which hundreds of millions of people move across the continents as climate refugees are also derived from the climate researchers' forecasts. But Patt says: "It is clear that terrible things could happen. But I now believe that we can prevent and prevent the catastrophe." Almost two years ago, Patt stood in the climate area in Zurich, the climate youth had invited him and "all the other researchers in Switzerland who are working on the climate. It was a 'Ah, you're here too, good to see you'». Patt was impressed by the professionalism of the boys, how they dealt with them, the old researchers. And impressed by her will. Patt joined the Climate Action Plan to become the most ambitious and at the same time the most concrete of climate strategy in Switzerland. The plan should set out for all sectors of society what would have to be done to ensure that it could work sustainably. But the mission to Patt and other researchers had a catch: the goal of a CO2-neutral Switzerland was to be achieved in 2030, that is, in ten years' time. On the date of 2030, the radicalism and impatience of the climate movement are evident. The official Switzerland wants to be climate neutral in 2050, just like many other countries. The goal was decided two years ago, it was a victory for the climate demonstrators, but they felt it was a defeat and have never overcome it. They are convinced that 2050 is far too late. The Climate Action Plan should show that it would be possible much faster. Tony Patt writes the chapter Mobility in the Climate Action Plan. He is grateful to the climate youth. He says it is incredible what has happened in politics in recent years thanks to the young people. But Patt also says: "2030 is unrealistic. The plan only shows what is technically possible. But not what would be politically feasible. Emergency measures were needed, like in Corona. That would not be socially sustainable. It would be an invitation to say to the right: 'You see, the climate youth wants us to stop taking a warm shower.'» Patt understands impatience, but he did not become a climate researcher for idealistic reasons. Patt is a skier. He tells us how he thought sometime on the mountain that maybe there could be no more snow in 2020. «I then thought about flying a paraglider, but....» He breaks the sentence and laughs. "It's not the same thing." Patt did not demonstrate himself as a teenager. He trained too much. Modern pentathlon: pistol shooting, fencing, horse riding, swimming, running. Modern pentathlon should be the ideal athlete. Surely they are the most versatile. This sport shaped Patt's life. At the university, Patt first became interested in mechanical engineering, but then studied architecture and landscape planning, and when he realized that he did not want to work as an architect, he graduated in Jus. He worked in a law firm for a few years, returned to university, studied public policy, environmental law. Patt is a social scientist, but he can also calculate, combine everything, like in the pentathlon. "That's how my life works." Maybe that's why he sees things differently. Patt studies other indicators. Not only economic, but also technical. He believes that change towards a decarbonised society will soon accelerate. Faster. There are indicators that indicate this. But we needed patience. The next IPCC report will highlight this hope more strongly. Patt believes that the impatience of the climate youth has helped for a long time. The vehemence they fought with. But now she can be dangerous. She's changing the look at reality. Without the CO2 Act, it would be difficult and very expensive to achieve the 2050 target. Do the youths want too much too fast? Tony Patt doesn't want to say anything. Once he was as pessimistic as the boys, now he is cautiously hopeful. But the young people could misunderstand this optimism. As naivety. Even as a betrayal. With the rebels A role-playing game in front of the church Wipkingen above Zurich: A man walks with tacky steps towards an empty wooden chair. He moves his hands like he's driving a car. Then he cries out to the wooden chair: "What is this? I want to drive through here!» The chair gives no answer. The man keeps screaming. An elderly woman joins. "Stop, this is a roadblock, for the climate!" she says. "I don't care. I have to go to work, what the hell!", shouts the man. "It's a climate emergency, we'll draw attention to it with the blockade." "I'll run over it!" A man interrupts the exercise. "And how do you feel?" he asks the woman. "Not so good, it's stressful, I don't know if I can do that in reality." "Then maybe you'll let it go better." The man who calms down here is the workshop leader this evening in front of the church, which is used by the climate movement for training and meetings. He is almost fifty years old, has already participated in university occupations and is now part of the Extinction Rebellion group. This Thursday he wants to train new activists. Extinction Rebellion is the behavioral side drive of the climate movement. The rebels chain up, block highways, dye rivers green. Civil disobedience is not only allowed, but indicated, given the dramatic nature of the situation. Finally, not only animal species would die out, but mankind would eventually die out as a result of it. In fact, this should be the arm of the movement that could most likely develop towards the eco-terrorists of the 1980s. But no future Marco Camenisch is hiding in front of the church. It's a group of scared people who sometimes seem as if they were terrified by the extent of their own fear of the soon end of the world. For three hours, they practice blockages in the cold, scream at chairs or trees, listen inside and hear what feelings this causes. So they can find out if they're actually ready to sit in front of a real car, like on the Zurich Quai Bridge. The woman, who was afraid during the exercise, asks at some point: "But what should we tell people if they ask us what to do about extinction?" The course leader thinks that this is a good question. "But it's not our job to have an answer to that. We point out that we are destroying our own livelihoods. Ask back: 'What could you do to avert the catastrophe?'» Extinction Rebellion has already proposed a solution, but it sounds as naive as it is familiar: meetings by chance, but representative of the population of selected citizens should deal with the problems of climate change and also propose solutions at the same time. "That sounds like a parliament?" "Exactly," says the course leader. «But without representation of interests.» A few days later, activists from Extinction Rebellion will be on the streets throughout Switzerland. In Basel, two police officers will carry a woman from the street wearing a sign around her neck, which says: "I am very afraid to become a mother because of the climate crisis." In Sion, a man with a white flag will block the road. On a sign it says: «J-ai peur d-avoir faim en europe à cause de la sécheresse.» Blick.ch will later spread a video showing an angry driver pulling a demonstrator from the street. "I just wanted to keep driving," he will say. The «View» headlines: «Do not such nerve actions harm climate activists?» The tragedy of every movement of nerve actions? Climate activists fear that they are just a drug for society. But the more laborious they become, the sooner the population perceives them as a disease rather than a drug. In the movement, one struggles with this perception. A climate activist says: "Politics does not deal with the climate crisis, but with the climate movement as a problem that needs to be solved." This is the moment when the fate of many protest movements decides. Some people are angry that everything is going too slowly. They want more faster and think they need to be louder. The others are afraid that this way those who would be receptive will be completely in front of their heads. Would a young citizen also feel comfortable in the movement? When you ask the activists this question, they usually only laugh and mean that someone like that would have a hard time with us. In fact, they have achieved a great deal. Four years ago, climate change was a topic for the left and the Greens, and now even the FDP is desperately trying to find a way to deal with it. Large corporations such as Nestlé, Ikea or Novartis want to be climate neutral by 2050 or even by 2030. And how Switzerland will deal with the climate crisis is a question that is now being discussed as intensively as it is about the next AHV revision. That's the boy's credit. Fear is blinding, they say. Do the climate activists therefore not see who shaped society more: Jo Lang, who entered the system, or the principle riders who never wanted to break away from their maximum demands? Perhaps it is the tragedy of every protest movement that this dilemma always comes to mind: whoever remains true to himself sometimes stands in the way of himself. Every wave breaks at some point. But there's always a next wave.