The TCS wants to get away from the car Switzerland has known the touring club as a towing service for 125 years. Today he's trying everything to get away from this image. Gioia da Silva, Text, Simon Tanner, Pictures More and more cars on the streets, but stagnant membership numbers: the TCS is losing its place. Patrik Gresch is in the mood for breakdowns. The first order on this Friday afternoon has just popped up on the screen of his service phone: "Renault Captur, Langensteinstrasse Zurich, is not running." Gresch enters the address into the GPS, starts the engine and selects the customer's number. "I'll be with you in 23 minutes," he says to the hands-free system. Then he pushes on the accelerator. Gresch is TCS's flagship cruiser. Whenever journalists come, they send him: 24 years old, employees of the year 2019, perfectly shaved and hairdressed. One who gets up in the morning, not to fix cars, but to help people. The customer has a sympathetic sound on the phone, says Gresch, "that's a green one." There were three types of customers in the breakdown service: green, red and blue. The Greens were kind and grateful if he could help them. The reds are alpha animals, they wanted the last word and perhaps also a compliment for their beautiful car. The Blues are the Analyticals. They would already describe their problem on the phone with technical details and wanted to understand how the breakdown had occurred. "As a breakdown worker, I'm also a bit of a psychologist," says Gresch. 8 minutes to Langensteinstrasse. Likes cars and people: the TCS patroller Patrik Gresch. View into a TCS service car. For the Blues: the problem analysis Many Swiss people used to join the TCS as soon as they bought their first car – because of the breakdown service. Today, vehicle insurance and car garages also sell breakdown services. The competition has become tougher. This is reflected in the number of members: the number of cars has increased by one fifth in the past twenty years. But the number of members of the TCS stagnates with 1.5 million drivers. This means that the TCS remains the giant among the Swiss transport clubs, but its core business – the breakdown service – is losing its place. This is also due to the fact that modern cars are less prone to panic. The number of breakdowns on Swiss roads has been around 360 000 breakdowns per year for two decades. Especially electric cars are more reliable than vehicles with internal combustion engines. This may be pleasing for drivers, but the breakdown service of the TCS will therefore receive less calls for help in the future. By 2035, the majority of cars on Swiss roads are likely to be battery powered. In addition, the car loses meaning as a status symbol. Even the bosses of the biggest German car manufacturers say that. Although there is still noise due to the noisy engines of autoposers, all in all, young adults today love to drive less than the generations before them. In 1994, more than 70 percent of all young adults had a driver's pass, now only 60 percent. If the car loses, the TCS loses. The club therefore tries to reinvent itself as a «mobility service provider». Members should call the TCS if the bike has a plate or the train fails. Recently he also takes care of broken ovens, dripping faucets or defective heaters. He sells free credit cards and gives courses for toy drones. Nevertheless, most TCS members are still motorists. The breakdown serviceman Gresch drives into the finish road. The customer has already opened the hood. "I accidentally turned on the headlight when I got out, now the battery is probably empty," the man describes the problem. Gresch pulls off the protective cover of the car battery and measures the voltage with a voltmeter. "Yes, that's too deep," he says. He crawls a bridge cable from his charging surface, attaches the red terminal to the contact point of the battery and the black terminal to a metal tube in the engine. Then he connects the bridge cable to the socket in his vehicle. 12 volts needed the battery in the Renault Captur. With the voltmeter, Gresch measures only 11.7 volts. The red terminal of the bridge cable is connected to the positive pole of the battery. For the Greens: a little bit of environmental protection TCS also works politically for batteries that need to be charged. "Switzerland has enormous need for action in the charging infrastructure for electric cars," says Central President Peter Goeschi. "With public and private charging stations, the framework conditions must be created for the people who want to use an electric car to be able to do so." The TCS is therefore strong for electromobility, even if it could cost thousands of orders in the breakdown service. But he can take this freedom as a non-profit-oriented association. The TCS is also in favour of the CO2 Act, on which Switzerland will vote in June. It is "a good-Swiss compromise," says Goeschi, "without bans and with reasonable high-rate taxes on fuels." At local level, however, the limits of the green paint that the TCS misses itself are evident. For example, in Geneva. There, the club delays the creation of new cycle paths with the introduction of the TCS – just in the city, where the TCS was founded by cyclists. You're for slow traffic, but only if he doesn't take the cars away. For the Red: Alpha animals and compliments The patrol driver Gresch bends in the car to the ignition key. The engine starts, the customer laughs relieved. "That went faster than expected," he says. The breakdown management didn't take five minutes. Gresch removes the bridge cable and closes the bonnet. If the customer were not a TCS member, he would have had to pay 193 francs for the service. Instead, he expresses his gratitude. Gresch wishes a good ride on. By 2010, the TCS itself had a breakdown. Power struggles between the local sections and the Central Council paralyzed the organization. It was about money and influence. Then came Peter Goeschi, who still presides over the Central Council. He incorporated the sections into the Board of Directors. He gave power to the opposition. Since then, the TCS has been dealing less with itself and more with the future of mobility. Autonomous driving, car sharing models, hydrogen-powered trucks: When the future comes to the road, the TCS wants to be ready. For example, with an insurance benefit for flying taxis. The breakdown serviceman Gresch is still at the place of the breakdown, on Langensteinstrasse. He types "battery discharge from self-indebtedness" into his service phone, for internal statistics. Then he'll clear himself for the next breakdown. Gresch will be working until 11:00. He will be towed off a Porsche oldtimer at work, freed a dog from a locked car, diagnosed with marten damage. Although the TCS wants to be anything but an old car club, it is still at its core exactly that: over 200 men and 3 women who solve every problem in any weather, at any time. Almost, definitely.