DECLARED - The CO2 Act at a glance Switzerland will vote on the revised CO2 Act on 13 June. It aims to halve greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared to 1990 with new environmental taxes and stricter regulations for buildings and vehicles. Against this request, automobile, transport and oil associations have submitted the referendum. David Vonplon Illustration: Jonas Oesch The most important thing in brief The total revision of the CO2 Act will set climate policy after 2020. The aim is to halve greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared to 1990. To this end, at least 75 percent of the measures are to be taken domestically. Higher taxes on fuel oil and gas will be introduced, new cars and buildings will be subject to stricter targets and limits. Importers of fossil fuels are obliged to compensate for a higher proportion of CO2 emissions. This leads to a surcharge of the petrol and diesel price of a maximum of 12 raps. Those who fly will have to pay a CO2 levy in the future. Depending on the class and travel distance, it is between 30 and 120 francs. Those who fly little or not at all will be rewarded by the redistribution. We vote on this With the total revision of the CO2 Act, climate policy will be defined after 2020. It implements the 2015 Paris Climate Agreement, which obliges Switzerland to make its contribution to limiting the global temperature rise to below 2 degrees. This is to halve greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared to 1990. 75 percent of CO2 savings are to be made domestically. To achieve this goal, the bill focuses on financial incentives for more climate-friendly behaviour, stricter regulations for vehicles and buildings, and subsidies for investments in climate-friendly technologies. The individual measures at a glance: Fuel oil and gas According to the CO2 Act, the steering levy on fossil fuels such as fuel oil, gas and coal may not exceed CHF 120 per tonne of CO2. The revised law now aims to raise the maximum rate to 210 francs per tonne. If the emissions in 2022 exceed 60 percent of the 1990 emissions, the 2024 levy is expected to rise for the first time from today's 96 francs to 140 or 145 francs. Two thirds of the revenue from the levy is distributed back to the population and the economy. Each person receives the same amount through the health insurance, regardless of how many fossil fuels it uses. A third of the CO2 dues flow into the Climate Fund, which financially supports the implementation of climate-friendly measures in buildings. Newly, all companies can free themselves from the CO2 levy on fuels, which has so far only been possible for companies with very high emissions. This requires that businesses sign a target agreement in which they undertake to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. Air ticket tax A ticket tax will be levied on departures from Switzerland in the future. Depending on the class and travel distance, it is between 30 and 120 francs and must also be paid by foreign passengers. Unlike the local population, they do not benefit from the reimbursement provided for in the law. This is 60 francs for people who do not fly at all. Anyone who makes a holiday in Europe once a year by plane will have 30 francs more in the wallet at the end of the year via health insurance. For commercial and private jet flights from Switzerland, the charge is between CHF 500 and CHF 3000 per flight, depending on the weight of the aircraft and travel distance. In total, 51 percent of the income from the ticket tax is distributed back to the economy and the population via the health insurance fund. 49 percent of the revenues also feed the Climate Fund, which provides funds, among other things, to promote the development and use of CO2-neutral fuels. Petrol price Importers of fuels are obliged to compensate for a higher proportion of CO2 emissions (new 90 percent). The costs can be passed on to drivers in the form of a surcharge on petrol and diesel. The maximum impact may be 10 Rapps up to 2024 and 12 Rapps up to 2025. They decide whether and how much the fuel importers actually increase the price of petrol, depending on the market situation themselves. Holders of electric cars are not affected by this surcharge. New car importers are to bring more efficient vehicles to the market in the future. The CO2 targets for new cars – cars, vans and trucks – are therefore being tightened. Today's target value for new passenger cars of 95 grams per kilometre from 2025 is to be reduced by 15 percent and 38 percent from 2030. If importers do not meet these requirements for their new fleets, they must pay penalties. Buildings From 2023, new buildings may no longer emit CO2. Oil and gas heating is not prohibited in existing buildings. However, homeowners can only install them if the house is well insulated. A limit value of 20 kilograms of CO2 per square meter applies. It is to be reduced by 5 kilograms every five years. Climate Fund The new fund will be endowed with around one billion Swiss francs per year. The money is intended to finance different measures for climate protection. Within the framework of the existing building programme, a maximum of 450 million Swiss francs will be paid out of funding for energy renovations. The construction of charging stations for electric vehicles in residential areas as well as the planning of district heating networks are also supported. At the same time, the Fund will help to break through climate-friendly technologies, for example by granting guarantees and grants to companies. Contributions for night trains or initial funding for the production of synthetic kerosene are also foreseen. Finally, communities in regions heavily affected by climate change should also receive money to protect themselves against floods, mudslides or mountain falls. That's why it's important Since 1850, the temperature in Switzerland has increased by around 2 degrees Celsius – twice as high as the global average. The direct climatic consequences are an increase in heat waves and heavy precipitations, a tendency to dry summers, a significant decrease in snow cover and a melting of glaciers. This has an impact on agriculture, energy supply, tourism, water balance, forests, biodiversity and health. According to the science, the reason for the temperature increase is the emission of greenhouse gases. If this is not reduced, climate change will cause very high costs in the medium term. According to the OECD, the cost of unchecked global warming is up to 10 percent of its economic output (GDP) by the end of the century. According to the Federal Office for the Environment (Bafu), these estimates can also be transferred to Switzerland. By the middle of the century, unbridled climate change in Switzerland could lead to costs of up to 4 percent of economic output. The template includes financial incentives to reward climate-friendly behaviour. In the wallet this is especially noticeable to homeowners, tenants, drivers and passengers. Those who cause little CO2 will benefit financially. Those who cause a lot of CO2 pay more. A family of four, which heats with oil, travels on a plane on holiday and has a petrol or diesel car, receives an average additional cost of around 97 francs with the revised law according to the federal government at the end of the 2020s. If the family is fossil-free and does not fly in a year, 668 francs will flow back to them each year. That's what supporters say Behind the total revision of the CO2 law, all parties except the SVP have stood up. The Economiesuisse Business Association and the chemical/pharma associations, banks, insurance companies, the machinery industry, construction and agriculture also support the law. The advocates stress that decarbonisation is an opportunity for Switzerland. Every year, 8 billion Swiss francs would be spent abroad for fossil energy. The new CO2 law ensures that this money remains in Switzerland. This would trigger investments in climate protection, which were worthwhile and would help to maintain jobs and create new ones. At the same time, the CO2 Act provides for cost truth: those who consume more resources at the expense of the next generations must also pay the price. Supporters stress that the tax burden does not go into the state treasury but benefits a large part of the population and businesses: either directly via the distribution of health insurance or indirectly via the climate fund. For the first time, measures were also planned for car traffic and aviation, which contributed significantly to the climate crisis. The inclusion of these sectors is an important step towards climate justice. That's what the opponents say Against the CO2 law, a network of eleven associations together with the SVP has taken the referendum. They include various actors in the automotive and fuel industries. They point out that the actual additional costs for CO2 dues on fuel oil and gas as well as the surcharges on petrol are many times higher than indicated by the Federal Government. For example, the additional expenditure for an average family of four would not be about 100, but at 1000 francs. From the point of view of the opponents, the new CO2 law is also useless. They point out that Switzerland's share of global CO2 emissions is less than one percent, while the largest issuers – China, the US and India – would blow half of all emissions into the atmosphere. Even if Switzerland immediately reduced its emissions to zero, the impact on the global climate would be insignificant. The opponents also criticise that individual populations are more affected by the new law than others. People in peripheral regions, agricultural families and the simple business sector would be asked to pay much more. They were more dependent on the car, because they did not have a dense network of public transport, unlike cities. That's not fair.