Climate protection: What a climate-neutral energy system could look like in 2050 The International Energy Agency usually creates widely-considered scenarios on climate policy and the energy sector. In the latest study, the agency develops a path for net zero. The report reminds us of the vote on the CO2 Act. Gerald Hosp According to the International Energy Agency, photovoltaics will become the world's most important energy source by 2050. Jean-Christophe Both / Keystone What is a global climate-neutral energy system in 2050? The International Energy Agency (IEA) dares to look into the crystal ball. It develops a path to achieve the net zero target, where the maximum temperature increase is 1.5 degrees Celsius. In addition, the energy supply is to be affordable and access to energy also for the poorest and the world economy is to grow robustly. One is tempted to say that it is about the Holy Grail of climate policy. Energy demand declines IEA experts paint 2050 as follows: global energy demand is around 8% lower than today in thirty years, yet global economic output is twice as high, and the world's population is 2 billion. People more than at present. About 90% of the electricity generation comes from renewable energy, solar energy and wind power. Nuclear power is the main contributor to the rest of the supply. When the entire energy supply and not just the production of electricity are considered, fossil fuels still make up about one fifth – especially for the production of plastic. Technologies for the capture and storage of carbon dioxide are also used. The IEA Roadmap makes more than 400 recommendations on how to achieve the path to climate neutrality. Modelling the future by 2050 seems to be challenging, uncertain and based on many assumptions that can be questioned. The IEA's reports are, however, a good starting point for the discussion. Extraction of existing technologies The IEA was founded in 1974 by industrialized countries after the oil crisis to better tackle oil market disruptions. Today, the Paris-based organisation advises the Member States on all forms of energy supply. And when we are talking about energy, this means above all climate policy and energy transformation. By 2030, the IEA will focus on solar power and increasing energy efficiency. In order to remain on the net zero path until then, the report states that the technologies already available are sufficient. However, this would require an attempt to promote green technologies. Market-based instruments such as the abolition of subsidies for fossil fuels and CO2 prices provided important price signals. Governments should also provide incentives for the necessary huge investments in infrastructure. In some cases, renewable energies are already competitive in a close look at conventional energy products. But the big problem is that the sun does not always shine or the wind blows just when it is necessary. Large-scale solutions for storing excess electricity from renewable energy are still lacking. It is therefore likely that energy forms such as nuclear power will still be needed to ensure basic supply. Investing more in research However, the IEA believes that in order to achieve the target by 2050, the use of technologies that are not yet marketable is needed. In 40 years, such new technologies will be responsible for around half of all emission savings. The energy agency sets great hopes in more powerful batteries, in hydrogen and in the filtering of CO2 from the ambient air. However, this would require the promotion of innovation and the necessary infrastructure. But what is the impact on economic development and income? The IEA experts assume that energy costs will increase. However, because economic performance is increasing more, the share of energy costs in the world's gross domestic product is decreasing. The model estimates show a significant decoupling of economic growth from emissions and overall from energy consumption. Energy investments should also provide a boost. Rosy economic image CO2 taxes and certificate trading tend to make energy more expensive. The additional costs could be around 700 billion between 2030 and 2035. $ annually. However, the revenue from this could be remunerated to the population, which would eliminate the argument of excessive burden. Over time, these funds are decreasing anyway, because emissions are falling. Governments must also adapt to this when they consider CO2 taxes as a source of revenue. The IEA also shows a rosy picture of employment: by 2030, the new activities and investments in green technologies would generate 14 million jobs. Jobs created. Of course, there are also losers of an energy transition: the job reduction in the field of fossil fuels will be 5 million. ==References== The job losses are expected to occur in a regionally concentrated manner. The losers tend to include the Petro-States and the producers of fossil fuels. According to the IEA, no further investment in oil or natural gas fields is needed if climate neutrality is to be achieved – which is a radical statement for the organisation that was founded to improve the security of supply with oil. This would make oil and gas more concentrated, security of supply issues emerge: the market share of the countries of the Organisation of Oil Exporting Countries (Ocec) could rise from currently 37% to 52% in forty years – but Opec members would still have to struggle with falling revenues because less oil would be consumed. Careful and radical The IEA also calls for increased international cooperation. How this is to be done remains open. The careful energy agency cannot engage in a discussion about greenhouse gas tariffs or a climate club that punishes those states that do not join it. In the extensive and at the same time detailed study, much sounds reasonable, some is far too planned, some too beautiful. Whether the IEA has found the Holy Grail of climate policy is questionable.