The SVP's anger on Swiss television is great The party feels badly treated – now it is launching a no-billag initiative light Chritsina Neuhaus How serious is it with the announcement of a popular initiative for the discipline of Swiss television by the Zurich SVP National Councillor Thomas Matter? He said that he was "bloody serious", but he claimed that the SVP party leadership committee had yet to deal with the issue. As Matter has pointed out to the "Sunday View", he pursues two goals. On the one hand, it aims to reduce the annual radio and television charges from now 365 to 200 francs and exempt companies from the compulsory levy. On the other hand, he thinks about a kind of quota in the staff composition of the editorial offices and the executive offices. "The Board of Directors of SRG, the Executive Board, the Independent Appeals Body (UBI) and the editorial boards of all political broadcasts are to depict Switzerland's political landscape," he said to the Sunday newspaper. He can also imagine a combination of both directions. A popular initiative that focuses on the message "200 francs for all", but is probably easier to communicate. «Great sympathy» It is not the first time that the SVP has fought the SRG and its institutions. Together with the trade association, the party was the most vehement supporter of the No Billag initiative. Shortly after the very clear vote defeat in March 2018, the SVP was already trying to move the matter forward. The two Zurich National Councillors Natalie Rickli and Gregor Rutz announced an initiative to halve TV and radio fees, but then put the idea on hold. Now the party seems to be making another attempt. On request, the party president Marco Chiesa says that Matter's proposal enjoys great sympathy within the party. Unlike the No Billag initiative, it was not a question of removing the basis of existence from the service public. A public radio and television service, including the protection of linguistic minorities, would also be guaranteed with a reduced annual fee. The party leader will now decide whether to pursue the idea. The drop that caused the barrel to overflow was the guest list of a SRF discussion broadcast on the end of the framework agreement. The broadcasters were – not for the first time – of the opinion that they could do quite well without an SVP representation in the discussion of the topic. The party leadership foamed. It considers SRF to be left-wing and no longer objective in the question of whether Switzerland should agree with the EU on an institutional agreement. Even left-wing journalists confirmed to him that most of the SRF teachers were left, says party leader Matter. Since the no to "No Billag", the left-hander has become even more pronounced at SRF. Neither the report on the agricultural initiatives nor the report on the CO2 Act was politically balanced. But he was not concerned with abolishing the SRG. He just wanted to put political pressure on him. The No Billag initiative had gone too far, which is why he had personally rejected it. Support in sight Unsolicited support has already been given to Matter in the form of the «Friends of the Constitution». The association, which had successfully taken the referendum against the Covid-19 law, can quite imagine, as media spokesman Michael Bubendorf confirmed a report of "20 minutes", helping the SVP in the collection of signatures. However, the sympathy of the constitutional friends is clearly in the idea of reducing the fees, he says. There is little to say about a "quote for SRG and SRF bodies". At least ideal support is offered by the trade association director Hans-Ulrich Bigler. Bigler was one of the drivers of the No Billag initiative. The Chamber of Commerce, the parliament of the association, had voted in favour of a yes with a clear increase. Bigler points out that the Swiss Trade Association (SGV) had already supported the idea of a fee halving in the national parliament. Against this background, the planned SVP initiative had the sympathy of the SGV, since it would reduce the burden on SMEs. However, it is not yet possible to say whether they are officially supported. "We have not yet discussed the question on the board." The opportunity of the popular initiative is open. SRG stations received a lot of support during the Corona crisis. At the same time, they kept causing negative headlines. The French and Italian televisions have seen incidents of sexism, the extent of which has not yet been fully clarified. SRF dropped popular formats and recently had to admit that the commissioning of the million-dollar newsroom continued to be delayed. A popular initiative focusing on a reduction of fees would be hopeless, therefore not. At least not if the party treats the idea as "bloody serious" as Thomas Matter. The idea of an SRG, which would have to be limited to its essential service-public tasks, would also be welcomed outside the SVP and the trade association. The SVP has therefore already achieved a first goal: the pressure on the SRG is increasing.