The arguments against the electric car are becoming weaker and weaker What brings about the switch to the electric car? Everything about acquisition and operating costs as well as the effective environmental impact. Herbie Schmidt Should the CO2 Act in the referendum on 13 May 2012 On the other hand, there is a higher cost of fuel and vehicles with internal combustion engines. This is known, although the assessment of cost increases varies. Some car owners are now asking whether it would be worthwhile to switch to a lower-carbon vehicle, both in terms of the customer's wallet and the environmental impact. The prices of electric cars have decreased significantly in recent years and months, due to the increasing number of units and the decreasing cost of battery production. The cheapest offer is the small SUV Dacia Spring, which is available with an electric range of 230 to 305 kilometers at prices below 20 000 francs. In the meantime, electric cars are about as expensive as gasoline cars. In a direct comparison between a VW Golf and its electric counterpart VW ID.3 the electric power supply with 204 hp is a starting model "Pro Performance Life" with almost 40 000 francs about 1000 francs more expensive than the 150 hp, but lighter VW Golf 1.5 eTSI DSG style. Large difference in operating costs It is interesting to see the operating costs, because here the battery car has significant advantages compared to the petrol engine today. In many cantons, the annual motor vehicle tax for the VW Golf mentioned in the example amounts to around CHF 250. And when comparing the fuel costs directly, the golf with 15 000 kilometres of annual driving power according to standard consumption (6.0 l/100 km) eliminates 900 litres of petrol. With an average petrol price of CHF 1 60, the result is CHF 1440. If the CO2 law is adopted, fuel prices could increase by up to 12 centimetres per litre with CO2 emissions, which would increase the annual fuel costs by 108 francs in the example. In the case of electric cars, most cantons grant a discount on the annual vehicle tax. In the canton of Zurich, the tax is even completely abolished. But this generosity ends at the end of 2024. The standard consumption of the example ID.3 is 19.4 kWh/100 km. At 15,000 kilometers a year, there are 2.91 megawatt hours. At the current average electricity price of 20.5 rappen per kWh, this results in almost 600 Swiss francs per year. However, it should be noted that charging electric cars at external charging stations and fast charging stations can be significantly more expensive. However, the costs are unlikely to exceed the gasoline costs of the example golf. From the point of view of operating costs, the electric car driver is clearly in advantage from today's point of view. This is at least as long as no tariffs are imposed on electric vehicle electricity in Switzerland. Such a tax by the federal government is to be expected, because of the declining petrol and diesel consumption and the growing demand for electric cars, it evades steadily more fuel tariffs. From the point of view of CO2 pollution, it depends on the period considered. If the emissions of vehicles are calculated purely for 15 000 km/year, our example of VW Golf results in about 20,5 tonnes of CO2. The ID.3, on the other hand, results in a thick zero. But this view is too short. For example, emissions from the supply of petrol at the pump and electricity at the socket could be assessed. In addition, emissions from raw material procurement and the manufacture of vehicles themselves, up to recycling, are also included. One speaks of the Cradle to Cradle consideration, i.e. from the origin of the car to the origin of the next one from recycled materials. These are all values that are currently strongly criticised, especially in the case of electric cars. Finally, for electric motors, magnets from rare earths and for the batteries lithium, cobalt, manganese and other raw materials are needed. In addition, the use of electric vehicles is far from simple. After all, the re-use and recycling of materials are the main focus of electric cars. Scraping is only the last option in rare cases. The calculation of CO2 emissions in the overall Cradle-to-cradle approach is complex. The Paul Scherrer Institute and the Touring Club of Switzerland (TCS) have created a calculation tool. This allows the ecological footprint to be calculated for more than 2000 cars. Comparison calculator for everyone The free climate balance calculator of the TCS is the first of its kind worldwide. It is based on an average mileage of 200 000 kilometres and uses data from the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI) and various federal offices (Astra, BfE). As a scientific partner, the PSI also contributes the models for the calculations of the CO2 footprint of vehicle production. The special feature of this is that due to the overall view of emissions throughout the entire car life, different types of engines (burners, electrics and hybrids) can now be compared with each other in terms of their climate balance. It hasn't been around the world yet. In comparison with our two example vehicles, according to the TCS calculation tool, the vehicle price of the VW ID.3 Pro Performance Life increased by 650 Swiss francs compared to that of the VW Golf 1.5 eTSI DSG Style at a mileage of 15 000 kilometres per year after 8557 kilometres will be amortized over the lower operating costs, i.e. within a good half a year. When considering both vehicles in a holistic way, the electric VW ID.3 compensated for the higher CO2 emissions from vehicle production via lower CO2 emissions during operation after a mileage of 38,783 kilometres. From this mileage, a VW ID.3 Pro Performance Life is more climate-friendly than a VW Golf 1.5 eTSI DSG style. However, this is based on the Swiss electricity mix, which has a high share of renewable energy. All these are arguments for switching to an electric car. In addition, the higher driving comfort of the silent electric car is not quantifiable, and it is also difficult to calculate its lower noise exposure compared to the petrol engine. And one last argument for the electrician: At present, the resale values for electric cars are significantly higher than those for petrol.