How high should the CO2 levy be? Switzerland is still building its "top position" in environmental taxes with the planned CO2 law Hansueli Schöchli The proposed revision of the CO2 law is "useless" and "priceless". That's what the opponents of the project that the people are about in June say. The proposal introduces stricter rules for buildings and vehicles, additional environmental taxes and an extension of subsidies. In fact, the Swiss legislative revision will not significantly change the global climate. That is in nature, because Switzerland accounts for less than one percent of the annual emissions of greenhouse gases. But the majority of the states have agreed that each country should make its contribution. Since no country can solve the climate problem alone, global agreements are intended to limit the tendency to ride free-board. If the Swiss contribution to the reduction of CO2 emissions is accepted in principle, the question arises about the best way to do so. The planned Swiss legislative revision brings two types of costs: the hidden ones (expansion of regulation and potentially wasteful subsidies) and the open ones (additional environmental charges). In the political discussion, the transparent costs play a greater role because of their visibility. And this, although according to the economic textbook environmental taxes could be the most favorable solution: one estimates the environmental costs, demands a steering charge to the extent of these costs, and the rest regulates the market without wasting. But in real life, things are more complicated. The market often does not function exactly according to textbook, and above all estimates of the climate costs of CO2 emissions are wobbly. Swiss CO2 emissions on fossil fuels such as fuel oil, natural gas and coal are currently at 96 Fr. per tonne of CO2 emissions; maximum possible under applicable law is 120 Fr. per tonne. A people's yes to the law revision would be the maximum to 210 Fr. increase per tonne. Crack points for estimates The 210 Fr. are not a "scientific" number, but a political value. The Federal Council originally had a maximum of 240 Fr. as a "significant and long-term price signal". The Commission has proposed that this be done. Due to criticism in the consultation, the Federal Council corrected its proposal to 210 Fr. The range of estimates of climate costs from international research literature ranges from about 0 to over 1000 Fr. per tonne of CO2 emissions, some estimates ranging from 50 to 300 Fr. per tonne. In particular, two study approaches are to be distinguished: it is estimated that the emissions of an additional tonne of CO2 or the costs of avoiding the emission of this additional tonne are the climate costs. The direct cost estimate of the output would in principle be more targeted, but it is more shaky. A core problem: costs are unlikely to be linear, and there may be tilting effects; if global warming exceeds certain limits, this can suddenly cause massive additional damage. A cost estimate would thus also take into account the risk of such tilting effects. However, given the large uncertainties about the thresholds and the extent of such effects, the estimation of risk is a guess. Another key driver of the large estimation differences is the choice of discount rate, which is the interest rate at which future costs are recalculated to present-day present value. For example, climate costs in 2050 of 1000 Fr. at a discount rate of 5%, a present value of only around 240 Fr. ; at a rate of 1% it would be about 750 Fr. and at 0% exactly 1000 Fr. A possible starting point for choosing the discount rate is the long-term yields of low-risk government bonds (in Switzerland by 0, maybe around 1% globally). A supplement is possible due to the expected income increases of perhaps 0.5 to 1.5% per year. For example, the importance of choosing the discount rate illustrated a review of literature from 2018. According to this, the most frequent cost estimates with a discount rate of 0% were about $200 to $250 per tonne of CO2 emissions. With a rate of 1%, typical estimates were more likely to be $100 per ton, and 3% discount rates often resulted in estimates below $50. Without value judgements, the discount rate cannot be chosen. Focus on prevention costs The global community of states has already liked a value judgement. The declared goal is to limit global warming compared to the "pre-industrial age" (e.g. ==References== 1850 to 1900) to well below 2 degrees. This puts estimates of direct climate costs in the background – in favour of cost estimates to avoid CO2 emissions that are incompatible with the climate target. However, the amount (future) prevention costs is also uncertain. In 2017, an international commission of experts appointed by the World Bank estimated that a CO2 levy of at least $40 to $80 for 2020 and $50 to $100 for 2030 would be necessary to achieve the global climate targets. The two co-presidents of the Commission argued in an article in February 2021 that, given the increased climate targets, the upper end of this range is now relevant – about $100 for 2030. In a medium scenario, the European Union anticipates a cost of around €100 per tonne of CO2 by 2030 and a cost of around € 270 per tonne in the longer term due to recent research literature. Today Switzerland has 96 Fr. One of the highest CO2 dues per tonne, according to a list by the World Bank in 2020; only Sweden was slightly above it. Most other countries included in the overview ranged from 5 to 70 Fr. per tonne. The Swiss "top position" can have a certain logic: in Switzerland, much more expensive than abroad – this may also apply to the avoidance of CO2 emissions. For Switzerland, an analysis of the consulting offices Ecoplan and Infras from 2019 ordered by the federal government on the basis of the research literature had a recommended value of 124 Fr. per tonne of CO2 emissions for 2015. This estimate should be increased for the future due to the increased climate targets (net zero emissions by 2050). Bids, bans and levies Avoiding the last tonne of CO2 emissions to achieve climate targets is likely to be significantly more expensive than avoiding the first tonne. This widespread assumption of rising marginal costs is also illustrated in the trend lines of international organisations. For example, the European Investment Bank calculates a doubling of the CO2 price between 2020 and 2050. From a traditional economist's point of view, steering levies would be seen as the main instrument and additional regulations would only be used if the levies were not effective. Swiss climate policy does the opposite: regulations are the main focus, and if they are not enough, the CO2 levy increases. The Federal Council has recently sent its 171-page draft to the House for revision of the CO2 regulation. In addition to many regulations, the draft also includes a roadmap with gradual increases in CO2 emissions if Switzerland does not comply with the progress table of emission reductions. A first increase in the levy from 96 to 140 to 145 Fr. Per tonne of CO2 emissions would be possible in 2024. This increase comes when Switzerland does not catch up with its last significant gap to the march table by 2022.