For and against the CO2 Act A close race is emerging in the vote on the CO2 Act. Proponents see this as a fair and socially acceptable response to the climate crisis. The opponents speak of a lazy compromise to the detriment of the middle class. It's high time we stopped exploiting the Earth to the last drop. We live at the expense of the following generations. Even with a lot of money, our planet can't give more than it has. We must moderate our lifestyle – whether we like it or not. The waste in all areas must stop, but we still have a comfortable existence. The resources are limited, and that cannot be changed by the economic elite with the teaching of steady growth! So let's take care of the blue planet. The CO2 Act is a small but important step towards a more responsible management of the Earth's resources and a sustainable energy and climate policy. Erika Bühler, Lanterswil The CO2 law aims to get out of fossil energy with a massive increase in oil and gas. This practically forces homeowners to replace still functioning oil and gas heaters with heat pumps or other systems. Motorcyclists and motorists should be encouraged to switch to electric vehicles. All these heating and propulsion systems lead to a massively higher consumption of electricity. It seems that the initiators of this law don't care how this is to be produced. Especially in the winter half-year, production from renewable energy sources will not be enough due to the short days with fog blankets in the middle of the country. Since no new nuclear power plants are allowed to be built after the exit decision after Fukushima, a huge electricity gap is created in winter. The coal mines will then pay households and SMEs. ==References====External links== On 1 May, it is well demonstrated that none of the arguments put forward by the House Owners' Association (HEV) withstands a fact check. The new CO2 Act does not contain any regulations on forced renovations. I know four neighbors who replace the oil heaters of their old houses. All rely on the efficient luxury variant thanks to funding: heat pump with earth probe. Admittedly, these are increased investments compared to a new oil heating system. But for this, the former oil tank room will become a new hobby room, chimney sweeper, emission tester and oil to order, they can give themselves. The annual energy costs are falling significantly, and the overpriced service subscription of oil heating is also falling away. And all this the HEV doesn't want to treat its members? A look at the HEV board members shows that SVP representatives often hold the power positions. It seems that the HEV has now mutated to the extended arm of the SVP. Patrick Hofstetter, Zurich All those who consider the anthropogenic CO2 emission to be a great danger already have the opportunity to consistently avoid emissions. If they did, a new law would hardly be necessary. Obviously, this serves above all to force others to do what they consider important, but not to do so themselves. This is neither morally convincing nor promising. Such a law would, above all, fuel prevention strategies, which are not least ecologically costly and entail new control. Innovations that create real added value (also in ecological terms) are gaining ground without distorting market intervention. State regulation will, however, stifle a lot of unforeseen things in the bud. Therefore, no to a CO2 law, which would first and foremost inflate the Bernese bureaucracy! Timo Rager, Herznach With the rapid consumption of fossil fuels, man is taking a dangerous path. For over 50 years, science has been trying to explain how the CO2 cycle works and that the enrichment of the atmosphere with CO2 warms the earth. Over hundreds of millions of years, nature has transformed CO2 from the atmosphere into oil, coal and natural gas and has supplied it in the soil. Man now taps into these supplies, uses the energy in a few decades and releases the CO2 back into the atmosphere. Man has thus become a force of nature that changes the world climate in a short time. Analogous events occur very rarely in nature, such as the impact of a giant meteorite or huge volcanic eruptions. Such events put the whole of life on its head globally – as 66 million years ago, when dinosaurs died out. In the current global warming, there is little to be done, and man loses all or part of his livelihood, because many of his habitats are too hot, too dry or flooded. The energy of the sun alone would cover the entire energy requirement of humanity if we used it better. Let's vote in favour of the CO2 Act and leave the nature-destructive path as soon as possible. Max Kläy, Meggen The new CO2 law is a purely state redistribution machine. Homeowners and motorists are being scrambled state-owned by taxing them higher. The money cut off will be used for so-called green projects. On the one hand, the owners of the house and the drivers should finance the eco-change. This state redistribution is undemocratic and of concern to the state. Especially since Switzerland is responsible for only a fraction of the total global CO2 emissions. New fossil power plants are still being built worldwide. The governments concerned should first of all be held to their consciences and put them in their duty. Koni Rüegg, Ebnat-Kappel I am also concerned about the cost of climate protection. This is precisely the basis of the new CO2 law, which has strongly influenced the FDP in Parliament. We must be aware of our individual responsibilities. Any action has consequences, especially for future generations. Since there is no cost truth yet, the consequences of individual actions are usually not always immediately apparent. The CO2 Act now ensures this. Thus, the person who produces above average CO2 pays more than the person who relies on efficiency and innovation. For example, those who rely on climate-friendly renewable energies will benefit. This is central to me. No one is restricted in their behaviors, but wise behavior is encouraged with incentives. Anyone who advocates true costs in the climate sector in Switzerland is well advised to do so on 13 May. On June 11, a "yes" to the CO2 Act was put in the urn. Barbara Franzen, Niederweningen, Cantonal Councillor FDP You are not to be overlooked, the sky blue posters and the friendly smiling heads, which under the keyword «climate protection» promote the new CO2 law. This sounds good at first glance, but when you look at it more closely, doubts are aroused. Policymakers and stakeholders have identified CO2 emissions as a new source of revenue, and that is what the next vote is really about. We decide whether the state will be liable for new additional charges for petrol, fuel oil and air tickets. Soberly, we calm our consciences by buying ourselves free with a medieval indulgence. Scary many profiteers of this redistribution already rub their hands and stir the advertising drum vigorously. The climate certainly doesn't care if the Swiss pay new taxes. Chinese and Indians like to buy and consume the raw materials saved. The new taxes are painfully noticeable and the resulting increase in inflation is for the less-earning population, especially in the countryside. Ernst Rahm, Schaffhausen It's not about whether we're stopping climate change, but about how. This will quickly require concrete and socially acceptable measures. The CO2 Act is the right Swiss response to the climate crisis. Because it is social and just. Those who emit particularly much CO2 will pay more in the future. But the vast majority of the population even gets money back. However, the present CO2 law can only be the first step. More must follow so that we can stop climate change for good. David Stampfli, Bern, Grossrat SP Switzerland produces less than one thousandth of the world's CO2 emissions. If we reduce this percentage to zero, it has no measurable impact on the climate. The opponents argue about the resulting costs. They will certainly be higher than the Federal Council promises and will ultimately burden us consumers and taxpayers. Every tenant, and most of us, will pay higher rents because of rising heating bills. And car transports are also becoming more expensive because of higher petrol prices. It is not the climate that will benefit, but the suppliers of subsidized solar, wind and alternative heating systems (which in part produce more CO2 when viewed in an integral way). An additional official apparatus is needed to check the situation. The state rate will continue to rise. This will certainly not increase the international competitiveness of the Swiss economy and thus the safeguarding of value-added jobs. If we cannot stop expected global warming with many costly measures, we should not let ourselves be blocked by apocalyptic forecasts or plunge into headless activities. With the resources still available today, we can develop creative solutions to deal with the expected changes. The world won't go down when it gets warmer. It also offers opportunities. During my career as a development manager and professor, I have taught countless engineers how to design resource-optimized systems and have been involved in many projects. Environmental protection begins in the development laboratory, and it is not just about CO2. Products designed to save resources throughout the life cycle are competitive. Our industry has already done a lot here. But it is now being burdened with many senseless rules and standards that we have adopted from the EU, and in some cases even tightened up. The CO2 law will make this even worse. Peter Schweizer, Neuhausen The opponents of the new CO2 law claim that the population must expect additional costs. However, the majority of all people in Switzerland will benefit financially. Since they are tax-based, those who lead a climate-damaging lifestyle pay more, and those who emit little CO2 pay less. The three most important points are: If you drive a car and if so, which type of car? How do you heat? And how often and where do you fly? The bottom line is that more money is left for people with a climate-friendly lifestyle. In particular, families benefit greatly because each person, regardless of age, will receive the same refund. The Federal Office for the Environment expects 167 francs per capita. And: part of the money will flow back to the companies via the AHV compensation funds. So it makes sense not only for ecological reasons, but also for financial reasons to vote in favour of the new CO2 law! Christoph Hochuli, Basel-Stadt, EPP The fact that everyone bears the cost of their own behaviour is a very liberal principle without which no society works. One retains the profit of one's own economy, but also bears the costs that one causes. This is precisely what the revised CO2 law is doing, albeit not fully, of course. Greenhouse gas emissions cause the longer, the more damage the state and ultimately the general public have to pay. That's not fair. Especially for future generations who pay the colliery. Stephan Buhofer, Lucerne