Free sense is slipping deeper into the formal crisis The FDP leaves a split impression on the framework agreement – it is not the only dossier with which the party is struggling Daniel Gerny, Simon Hehli, Christof Forster It is a clear "yes out of reason" that the free sense proclaims. The party writes that a yes to the framework agreement that creates legal certainty and secures the "normally important" continuity and development of the bilateral route: "The agreement takes into account the direct democratic procedures of Switzerland." Substantial post-negotiations are considered unnecessary by the party. It is on a February day in 2019 in Engelberg, when the FDP faction takes this groundbreaking decision – and thus strengthens its back to its Federal Councillor Ignazio Cassis. But in the following months, there is not much left of the free-minded claim to leadership in the country's most important foreign policy dossier. The agreement will be broken up until the Federal Council finally burys it last Wednesday. Swiss foreign policy is facing a heap of pieces. And in the middle of it is the FDP: your two Bundesrats have helped to put the agreement to death. Conceptless, weak in leadership Previously, Cassis had tried for a long time to bring the framework agreement to fruition. With great commitment, he explained the delicate topic to the Swiss audience. And he made the negotiations more concrete. Only in the last phase did he submit to the majority opinion in the government. His party colleague Karin Keller-Sutter was more skeptical from the beginning. The trench ran for a long time through the FDP-deputation in the Federal Council. Conceptless and weak in leadership, FDP politicians describe the following day the Federal Council's action to bury the agreement after seven years of negotiation without the involvement of the parliament and without an alternative plan. The foreign politician Christa Markwalder is annoyed on Twitter: "Which other democratic government of this world consciously and proactively takes disadvantages for its own population in purchase with the termination of negotiations on a contract, which is largely in the interests of the country?» Although the FDP is primarily responsible for the debacle, which does not break Jota's position in terms of wage protection. However, the party leadership cannot be excluded from the criticism from its own ranks. The FDP has not succeeded in implementing the 2019 parliamentary decision into a successful policy. FPD President Petra Gössi contradicts: "We could not do more than strengthen the position of the Federal Council." The business had never been in parliament. In fact, she could have expected solid support from the FDP Group there. At the base of the party, however, the framework agreement was anything but popular. And while the Federal Council was trying to get out last improvements in conversation with Brussels, prominent FDP voices increased, who wanted to stop the exercise. In September, the former FDP Federal Councillor Johannes Schneider-Ammann even described the dispute settlement mechanism as "sovereignity-politically delicate" – the beginning of the end of the agreement. Since then, the party has seemed to be slipping away from the framework agreement – with consequences for the European political debate in Switzerland. Criticism of the former President "The real political scandal is that the Federal Council, with its decision, simply prevented a political debate on the content of the agreement. There has been no substantive dispute," criticized former FDP President Philipp Müller, who made a strong contribution to the framework agreement. He means the internal political debate as a whole, both in Parliament and in the people. Tactical rather than arguing – the agreement has been gradually removed from the air in recent months. The FDP, too, has with increasing duration a clear statement: The statement by FDP leader Beat Walti in an interview with the NZZ of January about how he personally stood on the agreement is significant. He was well in the party's opinion, Walti said: "Rationally, it brings our country not only commitments, but also many benefits. I wouldn't want to bury it prematurely. However, I can only make a final judgement once I know the final result."The result is now known: the EU does not meet Switzerland in the EU's directive – the biggest crux of the framework agreement. That is unacceptable, says Gössi, with a view to the voting people. There will be further initiatives to terminate the free movement of persons. With an extension of the rights for EU citizens, such votes could no longer be won. Parallels to climate policy Some in European politics are reminiscent of the debate on climate and environmental policy – the second major issue that will shape the time until the next federal elections in 2023. There, too, the party president demonstrates determination – and yet only partially succeeds in anchoring the line to the base. Two years ago, the party's leader made a green turn. The FDP is now fighting for a yes to the CO2 law. The strategy is based not least on surveys of the basis. Nevertheless, this seems to reject the law by a clear majority, as several surveys suggest. Various cantonal sections have said goodbye to the no-parole or have withdrawn from the official party line with the approval of the vote. Gössi says that the position of the FDP on the climate issue is differentiated, but people are not open to it in the heated vote. A steering levy was not a ban. Whatever the result of the vote – in the evening the free sense will remain divided. Banger view of 2023 In the coming months, climate and Europe will continue to focus on key issues after the Corona crisis seems to be slowly approaching its end. It is approaching the half-time of the legislature, and the focus of the parties is slowly on the elections in about two years. For the FDP, it's a scary look. It has so far had the worst results of all parties in the cantonal elections. In view of the mediocre performance in important policy areas, it is open whether the free sense can get around the tax in good time before the fall of 2023. If this does not succeed, the FDP double representation in the Federal Council is in acute danger. Already after the 2019 elections there was an unsuccessful attack on an FDP seat. If the negative trend continues, the next attack will be much harder to parry.