opinion COMMENTAR - The Militancy of the Radical Left Should not Be Transfigured An icon of the Zurich Youth Movement professes to be a barbaric bomb attack of 1979. The boundaries between word and deed were flowing. Today, in times of increasing polarization, the dividing line to violence must be tightened. Georg Häsler Sansano, Bern Nuclear power plant opponent on the blasted information pavilion of the planned Kaiseraugst nuclear power station in 1979. Keystone It sounds like a robber story of veterans of a past battle. In the middle of the night, activists from the «Do it yourself» group blow up the information pavilion of the planned Kaiseraugst nuclear power plant. The perpetrators have not yet been identified – now Giorgio Bellini, an icon of the Zurich youth movement, is committed to the crime. The argument for the action was a narrow yes of the voter for nuclear energy. The question split the population at the time. AKW Yes or No was a question of faith – and parts of the radical left drew from it the legitimacy for their struggle against the current order. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. The flirtation with the militancy, the «action directe», was part of the spirit of the times, he further pondered and referred to the violent groups like the Red Brigades in Italy. At that time, as it is today, it was terror, which was not justified by the violence of the right or by the action of unleashed intelligence services, especially in Italy. It was the Red Brigades who killed the Christian-democratic politician Aldo Moro in 1978, among other things because he had campaigned for a «compromesso storico» with the Communist Party of Enrico Berlinguer. Compromises did not fit into the world view of extremists. Not today either. Leftist violence is often described as content-motivated and therefore less bad, because it stands for the good cause. Even the Red Army faction, which did not shy away from political murders, had a considerable support scene in Germany until the 1980s. But in all the shortcomings and unresolved past, the democratic countries of Western Europe were not wrong states. Anger becomes the programme The transfiguration or even the glorification of terror and political violence in the past is also dangerous with regard to the current security situation. The pandemic and also the climate crisis move people existentially. Future fears and limited liberties serve as breeding ground for rat catchers for their extreme agendas. The polarization of society has increased in recent months. Nor do words serve them as weapons. But also insults in the net or on the street produce their effect, shyly infiltrate and drive people apart. Unlike the times of the youth movement, radicalization can be observed at both ends of the spectrum – often a clear assignment is no longer possible. The anger alone becomes the program. Silent sympathy as an invitation In June, Switzerland will vote on two templates that will mobilise these very forces. For some of the climate-moving people, the CO2 law does not go far enough. The Corona skeptics are fighting against the Covid 19 law. In no other country in the world are the two fundamental questions in the here and now legitimized by a referendum. Both templates provide the basis for a real discourse. However, the agitators at the extremes of the spectrum do not address the actual topics and legal texts, but entangle themselves in the word formations of their own world. The argument for one's own cause moves at the edge of militancy. At some point, within the scene, violence also appears as a legitimate form of resistance. Perhaps, as with Giorgio Bellini and «Do it yourself», a result of the vote is enough to justify a militant action. Even if they come packaged as an act of civil disobedience or another ideological word shell: A clear demarcation against actions such as blockades and marches would be a sign against all kinds of fantasies of violence. Silent sympathy or a game with the slogans of the radicals invites you to cross one border after another. The political parties should also agree on this. The dividing lines to violence, even verbally, must be tightened more sharply.