Opinion GASTCOMENTAR - Climate and Agriculture: Blockage policy is the wrong answer The oil and agricultural lobby are barring the switch from conventional to more sustainable products. However, the demand for a more environmentally friendly economy is growing on the demand side. Thomas Vellacott "The automotive industry will change more in the next five to ten years than it has done in the past fifty years." Many people today would agree with this assessment by Mary Barra, CEO of General Motors, from 2016. Since 2017, world sales of automobiles have been falling by 28 percent last year, while sales of electric cars have increased sharply. Since then, vehicle manufacturers have outbid themselves with announcements about who is getting out of fossil mobility faster. Fossil energy under pressure The transformation in the energy sector is similarly dramatic. Sun and wind are now the most favourable sources of new electricity production for two thirds of mankind. The consequences for fossil energy providers are devastating: US coal companies, for example, have lost over 90 percent in value over the last ten years, while the oil multi-fuel company Exxon, the world's largest publicly traded company, tipped out of Dow Jones Industrial Average last August after 92 years. In both the mobility and energy sectors, changes in the demand and supply side are drivers of rapid change and fuel each other. In demand, consumers' demand for more sustainability is growing. Solar and battery technologies achieved massive economies of scale on the supply side and prices have fallen by more than 80 percent over the last ten years. Similar profound changes can be observed in the food sector. Here, too, the demand for sustainable products is increasing. Today, the global market for organic food accounts for over 100 billion euros. Interest in herbal meat alternatives is growing even more. The consulting firm AT Kearney estimates that in 2040 only 40 percent of the world's "meat" consumption will come from animal husbandry. For the oil and agricultural lobby, the rapidly increasing demand for sustainable products, technological innovation and the redirection of investments from conventional to sustainable companies are a fundamental challenge. They respond by trying to stop change by means of political blockade. For example, the oil lobby has taken the referendum against the Swiss CO2 law, while the agricultural lobby is cementing the standstill in Swiss agricultural policy with the suspension of the agricultural reform (AP22+). Their aim is to delay the exit from fossil energy production and pesticide and feed-based agriculture for as long as possible. However, harmful subsidies We cannot afford to stop in the climate or in the agricultural policy, too expensive is the blockade to stand ecologically, socially and economically. The status quo in agricultural policy is jeopardising our long-term food security. On the one hand, there are the far too high animal populations: Switzerland holds about twice as many farm animals per hectare as its neighbouring countries – the result is, among other things, ammonia surpluses, which are far beyond the sustainability of ecosystems. On the other hand, there is the focus on short-term yield: using fertilizers and pesticides, we get the maximum out of our soils and accept that biodiversity is dwindling and we leave behind a less fertile land. Today, 46 biodiversity-damaging subsidies exist in Swiss agriculture. No wonder, not one of the federal's thirteen environmental objectives for agriculture is achieved. Stand still and blockage will not get us any further. On the contrary, the longer reforms are postponed, the higher the damage caused, and the less we can perceive the profound change as an opportunity. Thomas Vellacott is CEO of WWF Switzerland.