Analysis of the climate law: Peter helps the SVP The current weather plays into the hands of the opponents of the CO? law. This was exactly the opposite in the 2019 elections. Stefan Häne Rain is more dangerous for people – even in votes. For the climate protection workers, things are more resinous than expected. According to the most recent Tamedia survey, three weeks before the vote, approval of the CO 2 Act is crumbling. Even the view outside hardly promises good things: no midsummer in spring, no drought or flood – nothing, therefore, with the climate protector fear of what they call "climate heating". On the contrary, on April, which was colder than usual, a similar May follows, grey, dark, heavy. The summer of 2018 was hot and dry. The green parties used this whimsically during the election campaign.Of course, weather is not the same as climate; the trend towards higher temperatures will continue. And yet, it seems, Peter is fooling the climate protectionists. But he was still their ally! Just in time for the last Swiss elections in autumn 2019, he had given Switzerland a heat summer. The summer 2018 was similarly hot, with dust dry. The green parties took advantage of this in the election campaign. As easy as it was then to present climate change as a real threat to the Swiss population, it is so difficult in these cool weeks. The climate activists themselves provide the best proof of this: they have to evade abroad. On social media, they warn of aborting giant icebergs in Antarctica and unusual heat on the Arctic Circle in the High North. But these events take place far away, too far away for many people. For them, climate change remains a rather abstract problem, unless they experience it in their own right. The weather actually affects the voters, as researchers have found out. So Peter took the side of the SVP. You may smile at the idea. Only: The weather actually affects the voters, as researchers have found out. They have examined more than 400 referendums in Switzerland. The conclusion: In the case of rain, people are rather in a bad mood and become risk-averse. If the sun, on the other hand, appears to be cheerful and more willing to take risks. And a good part of the voters, as the polls also show, see the new CO2 law as a risk – a financial one. The weather may change until the vote on 13 May. June after that. Perhaps, however, the big weather situation will only change after that – whether it be the political one.