Column Philipp Loser: Tippling moments of a legislature Are we threatened by a return to the bad old days? Philipp Loser (The magazine) Some are easier to recognize, some a little harder. Some come sooner, some later. In past legislatures it was first Brexit and Donald Trump, then the women's strike and the young climate activists. The talk is about events in Germany or abroad that change the general feeling, influence the atmosphere and turn the political momentum in one direction or the other – tipping moments. And these with concrete political consequences. Swiss politics operates in a four-year cycle, framed by the Swiss Federal Elections. The first phase of a cycle is often dominated by the electoral winners. Just like now. The first two years after the left-green victory in autumn 2019 were: Left-Green. It was not so crucial whether the voting results of the last two years were actually as good as the left-green had wished. For a feeling of superiority (for the «upper water») in the case of a normally notoriously inferior force, even narrow defeats are sufficient. As with the combat jet vote, the free trade agreement with Indonesia, the Burka ban or the corporate responsibility initiative. Suddenly things seemed possible that had been unthinkable for progressives, city dwellers, boys and women before the last elections. It could be that these people will remember in a few months with a certain longing for this time. We have just experienced a tipping moment. And a second, more incisive hint for next week. The fact that the framework agreement with the European Union would fail at the end was already foreseeable for a long time. At the latest, when the trade unions also opposed the contract in the summer of 2018, he was dead. Chanceless, attacked and criticized by too many sides. And although very few people in Switzerland were really happy with this framework agreement, its failure only feels like a victory for a force. The break-up of negotiations with the European Union, decided by the bourgeois majority in the Federal Council, is a triumph for the SVP. It is their idea of sovereignty that has prevailed, it is their struggle that has ended successfully – it is their moment. If you don't believe this, you just have to cheer yourself in the usual leaves or watch a teleblocher broadcast. It's called unchallenged triumph. The joy is so great, one could believe that the strongest party in Switzerland has never won anything in the whole life. And now it could go on like this: the CO2 law, marked by the feeling of the last climate elections and fiercely opposed by the SVP, is still on the verge of a week before the vote. If the two agricultural initiatives are also rejected (it looks like), this could be a rather hard day for those very forces that seemed to succeed until recently. A return to the bad old days. For this return, the end of an unloved contract and a single brief vote are enough. It is fascinating how fragile the political atmosphere can be in a shabby country like Switzerland. Fascinating – and quite frightening for all those who have now spent two pleasant years in their red-green-urban bubble.