Taboo break for climate vote on CO2 law Actually, science is not doing anything about politics. More than a hundred researchers now make an exception and stand up for a yes. Will scientists become activists? Stefan Häne and Martin Läubli It is rare that science interferes with political processes, even a voter's slogan. Actually, this is considered taboo in the circle of science. Now more than a hundred researchers, among them the most well-known climate researchers in Switzerland, have publicly submitted the "yes-parole" to the CO2 bill, which was published on 13 July. The vote will take place at the next voting time. This is an unusual procedure. For the scientists, the facts about man-made climate change have long been known. "The urgency of climate change justifies decisive action", they write in the communication. They see the broad-based tightened CO2 law as "an important step in the right direction" in order to achieve Switzerland's climate target – by 2050, virtually no more fossil fuels will be burned, i.e. climate neutral. The law sets the economy and the population a "clear framework within which the economy can develop the best solutions". Fact or opinion? Climate research is a burned child. Climate lieners and sceptics of climate research repeatedly denounced the World Climate Council (IPCC) that science is far too close to the political process of international climate policy. Indeed, there were conflicts of interest among individual researchers. However, renowned climate researchers such as Thomas Stocker always explained that the researchers never had to compromises that were scientifically untenable. In the meantime, only isolated voices can be heard, which maintain the accusation of dependence. Nevertheless, the current position of the scientists in the CO2 Act triggers different reactions. Science is not minded to interfere in a public debate, even in a voting struggle, says Michael Hermann of the Sotomo Research Institute. Another question, however, was whether this was useful and appropriate. For Hermann, the answer to this is "not so clear". It is important that the population is well aware of the facts in the climate issue. But the more political science becomes, the more negotiable its positions could become, says the political geographer. "There is a danger that scientific facts will suddenly be seen as opinions." This danger is all the greater if science appears too apodictic and signals that only it knows the truth. "In the present case, however, the tone seems to me to be good." Harsh criticism of the SVP The opinions in politics are dashed. "I am – as with the Covid-19 task force – against a muzzle for science," says SP Group leader Roger Nordmann. Other parliamentarians, who also approve of the CO2 Act, have similar views. These include those who have criticized the public relations work of the Covid-19 task force itself in the past, such as Damian Müller. "There is a crucial difference," says the FDP stand. For an advisory body such as the Taskforce, the principle of loyalty to the political decision-making level – the Federal Council – has a very different meaning than for private groups on a public question, as is now the case with the scientists and the vote on the CO2 law. Moreover, scientists are free to become public, who consider climate change to be different and who therefore consider the CO2 law to be wrong. Harsh criticism, however, comes from the opposing camp. SVP National Councillor Christian Imark calls the scientists "activists": "Under the guise of science, a socialist system should be established in Switzerland." That is what they are all about. The CO2 emissions in Switzerland are already sinking under today's legislation, Imark argues. "However, the scientists do not mention with any word that greenhouse gases can be reduced without redistributing billions and establishing new bans and a lot of bureaucracy," says Imark. That would make them untrustworthy. However, opponents of the vote have not yet explained what the alternatives to the CO2 law look like. In order to accelerate the reduction of greenhouse gases, there are much more meaningful measures, says Imark. Which are, the opponents of the law want to present in early May. The measures are effective Against such accusations Reto Knutti, ETH climate researcher, defends himself: "It is not about socialism at all, but about the future of our planet. Because we have proven that ownership and market alone are far from sufficient to solve social crises, there is a need for a certain framework conditions that everyone is adhering to." This was the case with waste, waste water, ozone hole, air pollution, phosphate, asbestos and pesticides, and it was the case with CO2. The academies of science have already shown various ways in which instruments such as steering levies and price surcharges, which are provided for in the CO2 Act, affect the behaviour of climate protection. The researchers refer in their communication to the fact that fossil fuels and fuels would be slightly more expensive, but a large part of the tax on fuel, for example, would be distributed back to the population. Those who behave climate friendly will therefore be rewarded. The young people's demands were always based on science: climate strike in Bern in May 2019. Photo: Dominique Meienberg Researchers' arguments for the CO2 Act * The world and thus Switzerland are not on course for the Paris climate targets. With today's global measures, we are heading for a warming of about 3 degrees to 2100. * Switzerland has only reduced its greenhouse gases by 14 percent from 1990 to 2019, but wants to halve emissions by 2030 under the Paris climate agreement. * A rejection of the CO2 law would most likely weaken Swiss climate policy over years. * Switzerland can only reliably export climate protection technologies to the world if it applies these technologies domestically. * Incentive mechanisms have achieved initial encouraging results in the building sector. It is now time to extend measures to include transport, particularly air transport. * The vast majority of leading economists believe that the benefits of ambitious climate protection are greater than the costs. (lae) lae / Läubli Martin «Have left the field for too long lobbyists» Mr Knutti, you once said that political demands would not be possible for you as a scientist. Now you have signed the Yes-Parole for the CO2 Act. Is that a turnaround? No, in principle, I am still of this opinion. But in this case, it is a matter where the scientific facts are clear and Switzerland has set the course. It has ratified the Paris Climate Agreement, which aims to reduce CO2 emissions to net zero by 2050. Industrial countries such as Switzerland must take the lead. But the Ja-Parole is a direct influence in a political process, which is considered taboo for science. The voting proposal is supported by the cantons, the associations up to most of the economy. Nevertheless, the outcome is not certain, the oil lobby and also the SVP have enough money to influence the mood against the template. The Ja-Parole is a hint that we must not let ourselves be misled by the interests of the car and oil lobby. We left the field to lobbyists for too long. Why did the climate researchers wait so long? For too long, we probably believed in a strict separation between science, society and politics. Germany is ahead of us. There is the "Scientific Advisory Board of the Federal Government for Global Environmental Change", which can directly advise the Federal Government on climate change issues and go to the public politically completely detached. It is currently effective in Switzerland to communicate directly with the media. I also try to provide fact-based information directly to certain people in Parliament. You take the risk of being an activist. That has nothing to do with it. I'm not losing my independence, I'm only providing scientific information. There is the example of the 2009 earthquake in Italy. They wanted to bring scientists to justice for manslaughter because they had not warned. If there is a risk that people will suffer or die, then it is our job to say that out loud. Martin Läubli