==References== June Voting Five proposals will be decided at national level. This is how parties and associations position themselves. — People's initiative "For clean drinking water and healthy food" The drinking water initiative wants only farmers to receive direct payments, which do not regularly or prevent antibiotics, which produce pesticide-free and which can feed their animals with food they produce on their farm. Yes: SP, Greens, GLP, EPP, Pro Natura, Greenpeace No: Bundesrat, SVP, Mitte, FDP, Economiesuisse, Schweizerischer Bauernverband — Volksinitiative "Für eine Schweiz ohne synthetic Pfestizide" The pesticide initiative requires that the use of synthetic pesticides is banned in Switzerland and that foods containing synthetic pesticides should no longer be introduced. Yes: SP, Greens, EPP, Kleinbauern-Vereinigung, Bio Suisse No: Bundesrat, SVP, Mitte, FDP, Economiesuisse, Schweizerischer Bauernverband Voice release: GLP — Covid-19-Gesetz In order to mitigate the consequences of the Corona pandemic, the Federal Council has decided on a number of measures and aids, including an extension of short-time work compensation. These measures are enshrined in the Covid-19 Act. The referendum was taken against the law. Yes: Bundesrat, SP, Grüne, GLP Mitte, FDP, EPP, Travailsuisse, Schweizerischer Gewerbeverband No: EDU, Verein der Verfassungsfreunde, Aktionsbundnis Urkantone für eine sensitiven Corona-Politik Voice release: SVP — CO2 law Switzerland has set itself the goal of halving CO2 emissions by 2030 compared to 1990. To achieve this goal, the Federal Council and Parliament have revised the CO2 Act. The referendum was taken against the law. Yes: Bundesrat, SP, Grüne, GLP, Mitte, FDP, EPP, Economiesuisse, Schweizerischer Gewerbeverband No: SVP, EDU, Hauswörderverband, Automobil-Club der Schweiz — Federal Act on Police Measures to Combat Terrorism The law aims to provide the police with additional instruments to prevent terrorist threats. For example, by imposing a ban on contact or house arrest on a person. The referendum was taken against the law. Yes: Bundesrat, SVP, Mitte, FDP, EPP, Swiss Police Officers' Association No: SP, Greens, GLP, Operation Libero, Amnesty International, Swiss Bishops' Conference (sda)