Oil lobby corrects science Analysis Before voting on the CO2 Act, the Avenergy Suisse association wants to reduce the impact of climate gas than it is. Now the oil lobby has also entered the vote for the CO2 law. The Avenergy Suisse association, which represents the interests of importers of liquid fuel and fuel, has dedicated its current magazine "Avenue" to greenhouse gas CO2. That's a debt. The introduction of CEO Roland Bilang reads, however, like an ode to a greenhouse gas, to which one wants to take the horror: "Carbon dioxide is far more than just a greenhouse gas, it is the origin of all organic life on the planet." But it goes too far when CO2 becomes a super fertiliser, which helps the world to produce a lot of new green. It is said that the green area increased by 25 to 50 percent between 1982 and 2009. The authors refer to a study from 2016 published in the prestigious journal "Nature Climate Change" under the title "Greening of the Earth and Its Drivers". This suggests that the CO2 produced by humans has an ecologically positive effect and the climate problem is defused by this increase. However, a look at the study leads to another result: Chinese scientists have found that it has become greener to 25 to 50 percent of the world's green spaces, i.e. plants have grown stronger and more luxuriantly by a stronger uptake of CO2. So it is not a question of increasing the area. The phenomenon is known, but the effect of plant growth is relatively small and can also have negative consequences in the Arctic, for example. No one denies that CO2 can be removed from the atmosphere with afforestation. But it is kept secret that forests can also suffer from a warmer climate. And under heat stress and drought, as studies show, they bind less CO2. Afforestations change the image of the sun's radiation on the surface of the land. New forest areas can also increase evaporation. In high latitudes and mountain regions, this can lead to further warming. It is obvious that the oil lobby wants to take the dominant role in the CO2 that is generated by the combustion of oil, coal and natural gas. Of course, there are other important greenhouse gases such as methane and nitrous oxide from agriculture and fluorocarbons from industry. However, how the authors come to the conclusion that CO2 will lose importance in Switzerland is mysterious. According to current figures of the Federal Office for the Environment, CO2 still contributes 80 percent to the total emissions of greenhouse gases. In the past, the oil lobby has tried to reduce the effect of CO2 by misinformation and concealment, especially in the US. Now that Avenergy Suisse is still reaching for this instrument, it's amazing. Martin Läubli