Renewable energies may cost something Survey Two months before the vote on the CO2 Act, the sympathy for the energy transition is great. Clean electricity is in demand with the Swiss population as never before, reports the Swiss Energy Foundation (SES). It was founded in 1976 and has been committed to an intelligent, environmentally friendly and human-friendly energy policy since then. The Foundation is clearly positioned against nuclear power. According to the Foundation's survey published yesterday, 96 percent would support the goal of meeting electricity demand with renewable energies in the future. The survey is representative and was carried out by the JRC Zurich on behalf of the Foundation in November 2020 for more than 1000 people. 95 francs more per year But are Swiss people also willing to step deeper into the wallet for a further strengthening of renewable energy? Felix Nipkow, Head of Renewable Energy at the SES, points out that according to the survey, a clear majority believe that sustainable energy supply can also cost something. Today, an average 4-person household pays 40 francs per year via the grid surcharge for the expansion of renewable energies. According to the survey, 78 percent of respondents can imagine paying more to advance the expansion of indigenous renewable energy. "Overall, the respondents are on average willing to pay 95 francs more each year," says Nipkow. The vast majority also believe that the energy transition should be implemented quickly. By 2038, the power supply should be renewable. The time horizon for the implementation of "domestic renewable" is only 15 years. In addition, the survey shows that over 90 percent believe that renewable energies are to be produced domestically. Whether the positive mood against the desired energy turnaround also withstands the second major practical test, can be seen on the 13th. ==References== Then the Swiss population votes on the revision of the CO2 Act. The first hurdle created the energy transition in May 2017: At that time, the Swiss people said yes to the energy strategy 2050 with 58 percent. Against the background of the long-term nuclear phase-out, the basis for the long-term supply of electricity to the country was thus created, including measures to increase energy efficiency, reduce CO2 emissions and promote renewable energies. "Totally ineffective" The revised law is now intended to reduce domestic CO2 emissions by 37.5 percent by 2030 compared to 1990. The law provides the instruments for this – for example, the promotion of electromobility and the use of climate-friendly heaters or the increase in the cost of flying. And that costs something: the Federal authorities calculate that there are around 100 francs per year for a family of four. However, the opponents expect at least 1000 francs. According to Nipkow of the SES, the survey shows that the sensitivity of the population to a new energy policy is great. He sees the results as a good sign of the urn. The CSR National Councillor Christian Imark, Head of the Referendum Committee against the CO2 Act, sees a different situation: "I am also in favour of more renewable energies, but the CO2 Act is about a purely redistributive action that is far too expensive and completely ineffective." Gregor Poletti