Analysis of the CO? vote: Lothe's flight to fairy tale country The SVP politician is in a mood against the CO2 law – with half-truths. Stefan Häne «We boys want to explore the world»: Camille Lothe in the video of the opponents of the CO? law. How easily the poison of disinformation can drip into the population – this is shown by a video with which the oil lobby and its assistants on 13 May 2006 June to obtain a "no" to the CO? law. SVP politician Camille Lothe is standing on a jetty on Lake Zurich, just leaving a ship. And Lothe starts. "We boys," says the president of the Young SVP Canton of Zurich, "want to explore the world, make new friendships and get to know other countries." Who wants to contradict this, especially now that the Corona crisis felt the distance has gone infinitely far away from us? All the more painful must feel what Lothe warns in the next sentence: Flying will be "almost impossible for many of us who have only a small budget". It was the CO? law that introduced a new tax of up to CHF 120 on every flight. Lothe says everyone should have the chance to explore the world. Camille Lothe is supposed to travel, much and far. Maybe she'll learn to tell the whole truth. It is – at most – half the truth. Although with the new law a ticket will actually cost up to 120 francs. But what Lothe conceals: each of us will receive a portion of the revenue from the levy in the future; the federal government expects to receive CHF 60 per capita per year. If the plans of the Federal Council, which will regulate the details of the law after the urn, are to be followed, one must pay in future for a short-haul flight 30 francs more, middle and long-haul flights with 60 respectively 90 francs to book, in addition an additional charge of 30 francs for a higher booking class than economy. Two flights to London would therefore continue to be possible per year without any additional charge. And those who fly more often and go on have hardly that small budget that Lothe is talking about. One has to travel to learn: one way or another the writer Mark Twain has expressed himself. In this sense, Camille Lothe is supposed to travel, much and far. Maybe she'll learn to tell the whole truth.