Filippo Leutenegger disturbs the otherwise held up harmony CO2 law The FDP City Council delivers a public exchange of blows with the rest of the board. It is expected to be close on 13 May. ==References====External links== This predicts surveys. The mobilisation will be decisive: Can the supporters or opponents motivate even more people to vote in the remaining days? In the city of Zurich, there is a special spectacle in this respect: in this regard, supporters and opponents within the government are given a public exchange of ideas for the CO2 law. It all started a few days ago with advertisements in which FDP City Councillor Filippo Leutenegger is promoting a no. «Filippo Leutenegger votes no to the CO2 law». This is "priceless, useless, bureaucratic," according to the advertisements published in this newspaper. She paid for the "Economic Committee No to the CO2 Act", the official No Committee, as its spokesman Ueli Bamert says. The other eight members of the city council did not want to be offered the position of the busy Zurich head of school. The retour carriage was promptly followed on Tuesday. Yes-Inserat of the other eight city councillors privately financed The other eight city councillors also spoke via an advertisement with portrait photos: «We say yes to the CO2 Act – For a modern and sustainable city of Zurich», says the advertisement signed by Corine Mauch (SP), Raphael Golta (SP), André Odermatt (SP), Karin Rykart (Green), Daniel Leupi (Green), Richard Wolff (AL), Andreas Hauri (GLP) and Michael Baumer (FDP). The eight city council members have switched this as private individuals, as city president Mauch explains. It was privately financed. The excavating of the former FDP National Council Filippo Leutenegger is piquant. With his no, he is not only opposed to his own party, which supports the CO2 Act, but also against the City Council, which only a few weeks ago clearly advocated more climate protection and anchored the net zero target 2040. Leutenegger: "Thinking of a bad compromise" If you would have liked to know how Leutenegger founded his solo run and how he stands up for criticism, he torpedoed the efforts of his counterparts for more climate protection. But he didn't want to speak out yesterday. Nor to the question of what his oscillating means for the working environment and the principle of collegiality in the city council. In an interview with the NZZ a few days ago, Leutenegger had said: "We maintain the principle of collegiality, and of course we do not always have the same opinion in the city council." And further: "But the goal of overcoming the fossil age is right. This requires a lot of work, time and innovation, no more taxes and conducting requirements." In the NZZ interview, Leutenegger described the CO2 law as a "thinkable bad compromise". He also wondered about the FDP: "As a former spokesman for the FDP on energy issues, I always took care to defend our liberal economic order and constitution against dirigist interference and more taxes. But times have apparently changed." Baumer: "Various opinions are part of this" On Tuesday, the city's FDP President Severin Pflüger did not want to express himself as a dissident of the German CO2 Act or its criticism of the party. FDP City Councillor Michael Baumer gives himself diplomatically: "The climate in the City Council is very well tolerated by such debates. From my point of view, different opinions are simply part of a lively discussion.» City President Mauch is also trying to keep the ball flat. The City Council had not adopted an official slogan for the CO2 Act. There were different opinions on the national proposal in the panel, and they themselves were clearly behind the CO2 law. This is a «normally important prerequisite for us to achieve the climate goals of the city of Zurich and those of the federal government.» She says she cannot express herself on the motivation of Leutenegger. But: "The climate in the city council remains good." Oliver Heimgartner, co-president of the SP City of Zurich, becomes more clear. It is very gratifying that the city government is working for the CO2 law across party borders. "Very unfortunate," however, is that Filippo Leutenegger, the only city council member, "can be included in the oil lobby's fear campaign and thus tries to prevent every step towards climate protection." Martin Huber