Opinions Column corporations as hidden voters Do the voters know that with the next referendum, they are setting some of the world's largest corporations in alarm and writing international economic policy? In formal terms, the voting proposals are about pesticides and fossil fuels. But with a deeper look into the political power play, large multinationals who have fallen into the defensive are steering and financing the vote behind the scenes. This vote campaign is a kind of war of proxy. The multinational corporations use millions because the voting results in Switzerland are perceived as acceptance indicators with a global signal effect. The nervousness at the headquarters of Syngenta and Bayer-Monsanto is great because of the two pesticide initiatives. Your participation in the voting campaign is undercover. The co-financing of the No campaign is via Economiesuisse, whose president was previously manager at Syngenta for 18 years. The referendum of multinational oil and gas companies against the CO2 Act is more direct and transparent. Because at first no political force wanted to be involved in a vote, the Brennund Fuel Association Avenergy Suisse launched the referendum itself and found only the SVP as an advanced political force. The Avenergy campaign is financed by the branches of the world's largest oil companies. Small Switzerland is not important for these oil giants. But with their interference, they want to suppress the signal effect on the EU and the US, which also committed themselves to the strategy "Climate neutral by 2050". This CO2 law has been carefully balanced by Parliament. It does not contain any prohibitions. No one has to give up heat comfort. It steers the new energy technologies much more efficiently through cost truth, economic incentives and innovations. Therefore, the law is supported by all parties at federal level except the SVP and by the well-known trade unions and trade unions. The SVP only sends its right-wing force into the proxy fight against the law. But above all farmers and tradesmen in the SVP base support it. You benefit directly from its funding. The House Owners' Association (HEV), dominated by SVP politicians, operates pure SVP party politics in its rejection of the CO2 law with bizarre black painting («Apartments for everyone more expensive», «Forced terminations for tenants») and thus irritates many of its members. Many family owners were the first to receive funding for replacing their oil heating with heat pump and solar system. No one has to scrap their oil heaters with the law. Everyone enjoys a guarantee of the acquis. The change to a heat pump is required only after the exit of the old oil burner and only in the case of non-insulated buildings. There is funding for heating renewal and isolation. This also benefits all tenants. The opponents argue with a small war of claims about gasoline rags and promotion franks. It is suppressed that the technological change of course pays off several times throughout the economy. Every year we waste 8 billion Swiss francs on foreign payments for oil and gas imports. Instead of using these billions for energy investment in the domestic market, it is more efficient! The energy efficiency program of the CO2 Act pushes forward-looking commercial sectors: for example, building automation, building technology for heating, ventilation, sanitation, assembly for heating, sensor technology, heat pumps, solar systems, automotive mechatronics. The apprentices in these energy-technical professions are the actual "climate activists" among the young people. You can't see them at the strikes and occupation of the Fridays for Future, which have been transformed into self-resurgence. Because they have to work in their company on the working day. But they are the ones who are making sure that we get away effectively from fossil energies today and in the future. It is irritating that the radicalised climate movement of the academic youth leaves the CO2 law unmentioned aside. If, according to the climate activists' demands, oil, gasoline and gas were to be forcibly dispensed with by 2030 – instead of by 2050 according to the perspective of the law – one would have to scrap over one million heaters and two million cars prematurely over the next ten years. I'm sure it wouldn't be climate-compliant. A rejection of the CO2 law would be the victory of the oil companies alone. They would be allowed to delay the urgent efficiency restructuring in the economy by many years with their exit technology. Rudolf Strahm The former price supervisor Rudolf Strahm writes alternately with Barbara Bleisch, Laura de Weck and Michael Hermann.