«Birdeweich, if a Swiss grid failure rinsing all of Europe into the abyss» The future of the Zurich electricity market The leaders of EWZ and EKZ warn that the failure of the framework agreement increases the risk of power failures. They say to politics: more solar energy! Lorenzo Petrò and Mario Stäuble It is the first time in more than twenty years that the leaders of the city and cantonal Zurich power plants will give an interview together. Urs Rengel and Benedikt Loepfe are in the middle of two political high-voltage fields: the halted framework agreement endangers Swiss electricity supply, and the switch to clean energies leads to fierce distribution struggles. The two electrical engineers agree: Switzerland is currently missing its own conversion targets. And it cannot stand outside the EU in the electricity sector. Urs Rengel, Benedikt Loepfe, how did you experience the moment when Federal President Guy Parmelin publicly buried the framework agreement? Urs Rengel: I expected the Federal Council to draw a line. Benedikt Loepfe: The electricity industry had already begun to prepare. Did you get angry that this was the way it happened? Loepfe: I am now speaking as a representative of the Swiss electricity industry. We are the heart of Europe's electricity grid. Over 41 border lines we are connected to Europe. We are interdependent, and it makes no sense not to work together. Both sides have a strong interest in this. From this point of view, I do not understand the interruption of the negotiations. The end result is that a power agreement between Switzerland and the EU is moving far away. Can you explain what this means specifically for your companies – and for our readers? Rengel: It certainly won't be dark in Switzerland. This agreement would have been important for Swiss electricity producers in particular, so that they can act well in Europe. I have the impression that Switzerland has already been left outside in various areas to signal us: it is possible, by the way, without you. Switzerland cannot be regarded as an island. The network is so strongly interwoven – either the whole of Europe is dark, or the whole of Europe is bright, including Switzerland. Again, what are the consequences of the demolition? Loepfe: Europe is now planning the next steps without Switzerland. This is about the "integrated market": Europe is trading the grid capacity and the electricity together. Simply put, you only replace the electricity, and the grid is included. Because other rules apply to Switzerland, we always have to reserve the capacity first, and only after that can we act on the electricity. That means we're getting on later and later. Rengel: Imagine the European electricity market like the Zurich transport network with its S-Bahn, buses and trams. It's like we're not part of this merger. It makes everything more complicated. Loepfe: Capacity planning is also automatic in the EU today. All national grid operators know what amount of electricity will flow through their grids – except Swissgrid. Swissgrid is increasingly confronted with unplanned electricity. «Unplanned electricity»? Loepfe: For example, a trade between Germany and France can flow electricity through Switzerland unplanned, because the electricity is looking for the path of least resistance – and it can lead through our country. The Swissgrid must respond to this. This means that she must invest in the network to make it more stable. Which in turn means: The thing also has a pretty impact financially. Rengel: However, the EU also has an incentive to work well with Switzerland. Only because of the operational safety: It would be "biresoft" if a Swiss grid failure would tear the whole of Europe into the abyss just because we were not informed about the unplanned electricity. So there are two dimensions: The demolition hurts us in the wallet, and it causes the risk of failures to rise. Loepfe: Exactly. How big is the risk of failure? Loepfe: For the next five years, it doesn't make us a stomachache. Studies show that in 2035 we will have supply bottlenecks and that the import of electricity will be more difficult. The point is, building a power plant can take more than 15 years. Two wind projects in the Jura, 29 turbines, we've been on for 13 years. Or the management construction: A project in the Thalwil area has been blocked for more than 30 years. If we have a problem in 2035, we must act now. 15 years is nothing. The conflict with the EU complicates the monumental task of the energy sector to switch to "clean" energy by 2050. Basically, is Switzerland on the right track? Loepfe: Switzerland is not on the course set by the Swiss energy strategy. With the wind, I don't see how we're supposed to reach the planned portion. Hydropower should grow, but in fact the risk of production shrinking is high. Photovoltaics will help us in the summer, but in the critical time, for example in February, it does not support us enough. Rengel: I also believe that photovoltaics are the only form of energy in Switzerland that still has potential. Water will decrease rather, and wind often fails due to the resistance of the population. They address the potential of solar energy. On the way to this interview date, we walked through the city between Hauptbahnhof and the EKZ headquarters in the zigzag course and looked for solar systems on the roofs. We haven't discovered a single one. What is it? Loepfe: They went to the search in circle 1. We have the problem that a large part of the buildings are listed in the register of protected local images. Solar plants therefore require a building permit. We certainly have plans for facilities in the city centre, but these were not granted to us after recursing. Or the static doesn't allow a building. But is the city centre the right place to produce solar power on the roofs? That's what I'm questioning. In Albisrieden you would have found it faster. What applies to County 1 is the same throughout the canton. Only a fraction of Zurich's solar potential is used today. Why? Rengel: Because it doesn't pay. Because the investors don't want it. And why don't they want to? Rengel: If you want to renew a roof in ten years, you can prefer it a bit and realize a solar system today. If the roof has been renovated recently, no one will want to rebuild it so quickly. So there are framework conditions that must be right. It's just like in agriculture: the owner of the house builds what's worth it. But I think that there are a few things that can be done here if the policy is to re-examine a briquette. What's possible? Rengel: Germany spends 30 billion per year on renewable energy. This leads, among other things, to the fact that the electricity price in Waldshut amounts to 35 rappen per kilowatt hour and not 17 rappen as in our supply area. If you can use your own solar system to prevent the purchase of 35 raps of expensive electricity, then you have a strong incentive. Which is why much more is being built than we do. Loepfe: As EWZ we have implemented a number of measures. For example, last week we sold 4500 square metres of photovoltaic systems on urban rooftops to citizens. This is not comparable to the redistribution of billions as is done in Germany. Rengel: I would be glad, for example, if the Zurich Government Council would allow us to use the 30 million profits that we distribute annually to the state treasury to promote photovoltaics. Or if we were to charge a charge on the electricity to support solar energy. The EKZ boast to offer a Swiss-wide favorable electricity tariff. Wouldn't you have the hand to pay more for solar power and make the construction of solar systems more attractive? Rengel: Not at all. We have no legal control at all, to beat all owners and tenants something on their electricity bill and thus to favor the construction of a solar system to the family owners. That doesn't mean I don't think that's right. I should just have a legal basis. But two years ago, the cantonal council changed the law and put it in sharp terms that we are profit-oriented – and that we have to produce our electricity safely, economically and environmentally soundly. In addition, the ownership strategy states that we should be among the most favourable providers. They play the ball back to politics. Rengel: There are situations where the will of politics is not clearly recognizable. We have a situation like this here. We do not object to the fact that it is said that once again, take a political instrument in order to help the expansion of photovoltaics to a breakthrough. Of course, this is a second agricultural policy, and of course this is controversial. Loepfe: An example of how this can work is the one and a half-miles that we beat on the electricity tariff in the city of Zurich per kilowatt hour and use to promote renewable energy. The council gave us this order. Mr. Loepfe, EWZ distributes 80 million dollars a year to the city. Would you also want to use this money to promote the expansion of solar energy? Loepfe: I dare doubt whether the financial incentive alone is sufficient. Large general companies want to write off investments over five years. But the investment calculation for a solar system has to be done over twenty years. You might have to put a little more pressure on the specifications. By law, how ecological a building has to be in the future. The solar expansion is also urgent because sooner or later around a third of the electricity produced here will fall away: Switzerland is getting out of nuclear power. Again, in principle: Is the decision correct? Loepfe: The path is unaltered. The Mühleberg nuclear power plant, for example, was not shut down because it was too old, but because it is no longer profitable. And that will eventually happen to the other nuclear power plants. At some point, investments in safety become so high that the operation is no longer worthwhile. And build a new power plant? We should have started 30 years ago. In the city of Zurich, we have the task of the people to do without nuclear energy anyway. After that, we have aligned our strategy. Today, for example, we produce approximately one terawatt hour – one third of the city's consumption – with 113 wind turbines in northern Germany, Sweden and Norway. Rengel: The same applies to us, but one has to see that Switzerland and Germany are the only countries that really shut down nuclear power plants. In many countries, nuclear power is experiencing an absolute boom. But at the moment, the decision is political. Not for you? Rengel: No. As a technician, I look at this question technically. For me, the following point is crucial: How much does Switzerland want to be an example? If you take the Paris climate agreement, its commitments depend on where you are already standing as a country. Switzerland has long achieved the goals of other countries – but you cannot come back from Paris without setting new goals. We once again set ambitious targets. If we continue to do so, we will be at a point in 2035 where we need significantly less fossil fuels. What if we fail to provide the necessary renewable electricity? Rengel: Federal Councillor Doris Leuthard has always talked about six to seven gas combined-generation power plants in Switzerland as part of the Energy Strategy 2050. I would not be surprised if we needed these gas power plants at the end of the day as soon as we shut down the nuclear power plants. From my point of view, it needs them. You can also use biogas to operate them. If you only have to switch them on every two or three years in emergency situations, it is idiotically expensive electricity that is produced there, but security of supply is guaranteed. Wind is not an alternative in your eyes? Loepfe: I do abroad. In Switzerland, however, the resistance in the population is enormous. We hope that we will soon be able to create two plants in Western Switzerland. But the middlelands are densely built, and in the mountains construction, operation and logistics are far more expensive. We are not really a suitable windland. It is illusory to provide four terawatt hours as planned. Will electricity consumption in Switzerland increase or decrease in the future? Rengel: That's an exciting question. In the years 2000 to 2010, consumption increased by 1.5 to 2 percent per year, roughly according to gross domestic product. In 2010, however, there was a turnaround. Since then consumption has stagnated. Probably because of the increase in efficiency. But now I think that there will be another phase of growth – because we get away from fossil energies. Because we electrify traffic and replace oil heaters with heat pumps. But interest in saving electricity has increased in the course of the climate movement. Rengel: The Swiss population is not prepared to stick to their standard of living. I also dare deny that people are being made to consume less via higher electricity prices. It's similar to gasoline. People really start to drive less when they have a five-litre liberator. We will rather save energy thanks to new technology. Loepfe: That's the cool thing about photovoltaics: you consume electricity much more consciously. Since we have a photovoltaic system on the roof at home, the whole family has been looking through the app to see how much electricity it is producing – and to do so in their activities. Usually, no one cares about the electricity. He just comes out of the socket. They both have children of student age. Do you have climate debates at home at the kitchen table? Loepfe: My daughter studies environmental sciences. Of course we'll discuss it. I see that the subject is different from the one we were discussing at the time. Do you personally support the CO2 Act? Loepfe: As heads of public power stations, we stay out of this. Rengel: But if you ask whether we as a company would benefit, I say: quite. Loepfe: I can only agree with that. The CO2 Act frees up resources to promote decarbonisation. Rengel: And this is only running on current. That's where we benefit. What do you say to the young people who are not going fast enough to convert to renewable energy? Rengel: I would tell them that the problem can only be solved globally. If the big ones don't join us, we can't make change. Loepfe: I still have too much talk about goals and year figures. I'm talking about acting. Are we taking action in concrete terms? My children take very concrete steps by flying much less. I have to say, Chapeau! Do your children influence your behavior? Loepfe: Definitely, yes. I eat less meat – my daughter is a vegetarian. Rengel: (laughs) I can't keep up. Energy perspectives 2050+ of the federal government The city of Zurich – a sea of lights. Studies show that, from 2035 onwards, Switzerland is expected to have a selective supply of electricity. EWZ and EKZ together supply around 1.5 million people with electricity. Photo: Urs Jaudas «Building a new nuclear power plant? We should have started 30 years ago." Benedikt Loepfe, EWZ "Photovoltaics is the only form of energy in Switzerland that still has potential." Urs Rengel, EKZ The interlocutor Benedikt Loepfe Since March 2020, Benedikt Loepfe (54, in the picture on the right) has been the director of the electricity plant of the city of Zurich (EWZ). The ETH engineer and former ABB manager has replaced Marcel Frei after six years. Loepfe lives with his family in Pfäffikon ZH. Urs Rengel For 21 years Urs Rengel (59) has been working at the power plants in the canton of Zurich (ECZ). Since 2004 he has been managing the company. The ETH engineer lives with his family in Zollikerberg ZH. New Zurich Energy Act An important reform is underway in the canton of Zurich with the aim of reducing energy consumption and switching to renewable, sustainable energy. Electrically operated heat pumps are to be the new standard for heating. Homeowners can only install a fossil-fired heating if the environmentally friendly alternative over the entire life cycle would be 5 percent more expensive. Connections to a district heating network or a gas network are also permitted, provided that the energy supplied comes from at least 80 percent renewable sources. This can also be done via the purchase of certificates. In the case of new buildings, part of the electricity must be generated on site, whereby land owners can join together. Electric heaters must be replaced by 2030. The cantonal council approved the law with 121 to 46 votes. The Homeowners' Association plans to take the referendum. (red)