«The measures are purely preventive» New law to combat terrorism Federal Councillor Karin Keller-Sutter (FDP) defends the new anti-terrorism law, which comes to the urn in June. The Minister of Justice has no concerns about the rule of law. Beni Gafner and Gregor Poletti Mrs Keller-Sutter, why does this law need to be applied, since the authorities are already granted far-reaching powers in criminal law and in the new intelligence law? Yes, there are already legal bases for combating terrorism. But the intelligence law is only for surveillance, for information gathering. The intelligence service can't intervene directly. Criminal law, for its part, only applies when a crime has already been committed. The draft vote fills an important gap here, namely that the police can intervene preventively before a crime is committed. For example, a terrorist threat can be imposed a ban on contact with radicalized colleagues or a ban on leaving so that it cannot travel to the jihad. That sounds good, but it goes far. Too far? We are already familiar with preventive measures in the field of domestic violence, hooliganism or immigration law. In these areas, too, the police can order measures to prevent a crime before something happens. Preventive measures are therefore not new. Legal professors and UN Special Rapporteurs fear that the new law itself suspects undefeated people and identifies them as terrorist threats. I do not share that fear at all. The measures defined in the proposal are only directed against terrorist peril. And these are people with current and concrete evidence that they will be carrying out terrorist activity. What are such clues? For example, if someone spreads IS propaganda on the Internet or is interested in building bombs on the Internet for precursors or is looking for close contact with radicalised circles. Up to the first point, this could also affect left-wing activists who visit websites on the Internet or participate in demos. These people are clearly not in the focus of the new law. You're not planning terrorist activities or serious crimes to get the state out of the way. There are worlds between a jihadist threat planning an attack, and someone striking slices at a demo. I have once again consulted the Minutes of the Parliament's debate. This criticism had not taken a prominent place. This became a big issue only when the friends of the Constitution, who also fight the Covid law, helped the referendum to break through. But theoretically, it would be possible. The UN Special Rapporteurs and more than 60 legal professors have already expressed massive criticism of the law and the definition of terrorist threats. I don't see the theoretical possibility either. Finally, terrorist activities are defined in the law as: efforts to influence or change the state order, which is carried out by committing or ordering serious crimes.So we are talking about people who stab passers-by with knives or drive cars in crowds. Or can you imagine that the Federal Council and Parliament are making a law that meets other than terrorist threats? In addition, the new law is also embedded in the federal terror strategy that has existed since 2015. That may be. But can you understand the fear of many people that after the fiche affair and the overboarding of intelligence agents in the 2000s, there are doubts that the police are now too expansive to define people as dangerous and impose measures on them? This scepticism was also evident in the Intelligence Act 2016. I don't want to talk them out of anyone. The proposal is in the context of the fight against terrorism and seeks to address the terrorist threat situation. This is still increased according to the NDB. The law also contains mechanisms to ensure that the measures are not applied disproportionately. The cantons or communes must state that they are unable to progress with their therapeutic or educational means. Only then can a contact ban be obtained at the Federal Office for Police, for example. In addition, all measures can be challenged by the courts. Switzerland is a constitutional state. ... who is not immune to mistakes and goes with this law according to opponents even towards the police state. Mistakes happen. That is precisely why we have control over the rule of law. The media also have a watchful eye, for example, they have helped decisively to ensure that the fichen scandal came to the political tapet. However, calling Switzerland a police state is absurd. In a police state there is arbitrariness without a rule of law. This is a law that guarantees all the guarantees of the rule of law, from proportionality to the possibility of challenging each measure in a court. The opposite is true: the proposed measures are designed to secure the democratic and rule of law foundations and to protect the freedom of the population. We do not protect the freedom of terrorists, we protect the freedom of citizens. Even if with this law whole groups get into the focus of the police? No, that's impossible. The new law clearly states that the individual case must always be assessed. That's different with the intelligence. He has a duty to observe whole groups. The law aims strongly at young people, so all measures except house arrest can already be ordered for twelve-year-olds. How big is the problem? In the UK, one in ten people in the context of terrorism are a teenager. We also see in Switzerland that young people in particular can easily be radicalised. The jihad travellers of Winterthur, for example, were 15 and 16 years old. Or the underage bomber from Eastern Switzerland – measures must be imposed. For youths, it is like a punishment if they have to stay at home with a shackle. These measures are purely preventive. A hooligan also feels disturbed when he is no longer allowed in the stadium. But that is prevention and not punishment. Moreover, we do not play a special role internationally. Registration, contact and rayon bans or exit bans exist in the UK, France, Germany or the Netherlands, for example. When limiting freedom of movement to a property, Britain and France do not even know an age limit. Opponents threaten to go to Strasbourg if they do so, because the law violates the European Convention on Human Rights. I look very calmly towards that. We have clarified this in detail and concluded that the proposed law does not constitute a breach of the ECHR or the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Especially since the law provides that child protection measures are in any case a priority. The authorities must always state that they have first taken educational and therapeutic measures before they can apply for measures under the new law. And quite honestly: Are a ban on contact, a duty to report or talk particularly hard? These are no big restrictions. "We are not taking a special role internationally," says Karin Keller-Sutter. Photo: Yvain Genevay, «Le Matin Dimanche» «To call Switzerland a police state is absurd.» June Around 18,000 people took part in the first Tamedia poll at the beginning of this week and 20 minutes to the 13th polls. ==References== The people will have to decide on five templates. These are the results of the survey: Terrorism Act A clear majority of 68 percent are in favour of the law on police measures to combat terrorism, only 24 percent are against it (the rest is still undecided). The template polarizes strongly: Only supporters of the Greens and the SP speak out against the template. In the country and with age, the law has a stronger support. Drinking water initiative 54 percent agree with the proposal, 43 percent reject it. "Experience shows that people's initiatives start with a head start in the voting struggle, which then erodes the closer the voting date comes," says political scientist Fabio Wasserfallen, who conducted the polls. That is why the 54 per cent approval value for an initiative at the beginning of the vote is rather low. The survey points to a strong polarisation between the city and the country: 68 percent of the urban population agree Yes, in the country it is only 43 percent. Pesticide Initiative The initiative for a Switzerland without pesticides is also currently being implemented by a narrow majority. 53 percent are in favour, which is probably also not enough for a yes on the urn. The same is true of the drinking water initiative: left-wing greens, city dwellers and women are in favour of it, while citizens, rural people and men are more opposed to it. Covid Act 66 percent want to approve the Covid 19 Act, only 27 percent are against it. Those who are close to the SVP reject the law: only 37% are in favour. In all other parties, the submission enjoys high approval. For the proponents, there is practically only one argument: 82 percent say that the law is needed to cushion the economic consequences of the pandemic. "Such a strong focus on a single argument is very unusual," says political scientist Wasserfallen. CO2 law 54 percent support the CO2 law, 43 percent oppose it. The approval is rather scarce here, too. According to Fabio Wasserfallen, however, the chances are better than with the initiatives, because the opinion in the vote usually turns in favour of the proposals of the Federal Council and Parliament. Here, too, the city stands (65 percent approval) against land (47 percent).