Debate Guest contribution The CO2 law is expensive and unnecessary Why the planned redistribution makes energy only more expensive than necessary. Roland Bilang SP National Councillor Roger Nordmann is strong in the "Tages-Anzeiger" for the CO2 law and verbally beats the Swiss oil industry. The former is understandable, since as President of Swissolar he represents the beneficiaries and profiteers of the law. The latter has a helpless effect, as it is the members of Avenergy Suisse who have been driving the development of CO2-neutral energy sources for years. Of course: Solar lobbyist Nordmann hopes that the law will increase subsidies for domestic energy production once less money is spent on oil. His bill is unlikely to work out. — First, energy self-sufficient Switzerland is a romantic dream. We will have to import more energy from abroad in the future, including renewable energy in different forms. — Secondly, much money will continue to flow abroad in the future, because we do not have the raw materials or the production facilities for the extraction of solar energy and its storage in batteries in our own country. China is pleased. — Third, under the CO2 Act, revenues from mineral oil taxes would quickly break away. Electromobility is then finally asked to pay for the transport infrastructure and to co-finance public transport. While the advocates of the CO2 law are seeking contributions from the honey pot "Climate Fund", the oil industry is presenting concrete solutions for a climate-friendly energy supply. For example, it has built up the biofuel market. Over the past ten years, the latter has taken the same successful growth path as Mr Nordmann's photovoltaics. No other renewable energy source has undergone a similar development during this period. In April, a member of Avenergy Suisse opened a hydrogen filling station. It's already the sixth in a few months. At the same time, a truck fleet is establishing itself, which is free to travel thanks to the rapidly expanded petrol station network with green hydrogen CO2. This project progresses without state funding and is thanks to the entrepreneurial spirit of the energy suppliers and transporters. These private-sector approaches are countered by a misguided CO2 law. Billions are to be redistributed for climate protection. The climate fund alone is expected to flow into about one billion Swiss francs per year – without any redistribution to the population and the economy. That's over 100 francs per capita, not per family! The management shall decide on the use of these resources. Homeowners are in distress because they have to account to the state for why they want to stay with their oil heaters. The new law effectively prohibits new oil and gas heaters and instead requires the installation of renewable energy heaters, whether technically or ecologically sensible. In addition, the CO2 levy on fuel oil and gas is more than doubled and only partially redistributed. The fuel prices will be charged from 1 January. ==References====External links==* Official website In this case, "only" to quantify the additional costs for the fuel is too short. Transport costs are rising and therefore the prices of the goods transported are rising. The CO2 law is not only expensive, but unnecessary. As described at the beginning, we are on the right track. The technically feasible and economically viable is already being done. Switzerland's CO2 emissions are constantly decreasing – in the last ten years, the per capita decrease has been substantial 24 percent. That is a good thing; we continue along this path and do not need a new bureaucracy monster.