Hot air for hydrogen Voting on CO2 law SVP and oil industry want to have found the solution for our energy supply. Scientists react violently: this is unfounded, untenable and unrealistic. Martin Läubli He is omnipresent: National Councillor Christian Imark is the head of the SVP campaign and fights with all means the revised CO2 law, on which on the 13th of October, the German government announced that it would not be able to implement the new law. ==References====External links== The highlight of his work so far is his 10-point plan, which aims to create the energy transition "without new prohibitions and patronage". He promises a «faster climate-friendly future». Its solution: fuel cells, internal combustion engines and heaters, which are powered by hydrogen. The gas is produced by electrolysis. This means that water is split into hydrogen and oxygen with the help of electric current. The electricity comes from excess renewable energy – preferably solar energy, which is generated especially in summer when the sun is the highest and the photovoltaic systems produce more electricity than is consumed. Experts see in this case an option to store excess electricity chemically in the form of hydrogen. For longer storage, the gas would be synthesized with CO2 to methane or methanol. The use of these synthetic fuels is diverse: they could be used as fuel for internal combustion engines or fuel in conventional heating systems. So the plan of Christian Imark. The energy experts agree that gas will play a role for Swiss energy supply in the future. Consensus is also to save excess electricity more efficiently than to take off the grid if there is an oversupply of electricity from photovoltaic or wind turbines. "However, the idea that the CO2 problem can be solved primarily by hydrogen without solving the question of the energy source is neither sound nor comprehensive," says Christian Bach, auto engineer and hydrogen expert at Empa in Dübendorf. Dependence on foreign countries Jürg Rohrer, Head of the Renewable Energy Research Group at the Zurich University of Applied Sciences (ZHAW) in Wädenswil, says less diplomatically: "Anyone who makes such proposals must be accused of deliberately supporting the fossil industry." Both scientists have been working on the potential of hydrogen for energy supply for years. Their calculations clearly show that such a large amount of renewable energy cannot be produced in Switzerland to implement the Imark plan. "The electricity demand would rise to about five times today," says Jürg Rohrer of the ZHAW. He gives an example to illustrate the order of magnitude: if one wants to achieve a supply of hydrogen and synthetic fuels, then further photovoltaic areas with a size of 1650 square kilometers would have to be created to the photovoltaic systems calculated by the federal government – and that outside of the building roofs and facades, on which the greatest potential for solar energy is seen. "This is simply unrealistic, so Switzerland would largely depend on unsafe imports of electricity and gas," says Rohrer. Another example. The 10-point plan suggests that natural gas can be completely replaced by hydrogen: "The high energy content is a real alternative to natural gas." Jürg Rohrer calculated what this would mean for hydrogen production: Switzerland imported a net of 34 terawatt hours of natural gas in 2019. If hydrogen were to be produced instead of this energy source, it would require an additional 50 to 60 terawatt hours of renewable electricity. This corresponds to almost the entire annual electricity production in Switzerland. The hydrogen industry is also to be the focus of mobility. To illustrate the dimension: If all cars, delivery and lorries were converted to hydrogen and fuel cells by 2030, electricity demand would increase by 50 terawatt hours. If the cars were hypothetically on the road with an engine that burns synthetic gas, one would have to additionally produce the double current electricity production. The most efficient technical solution remains the electrical one. According to Rohrer, electrified mobility leads to a multi-current demand of 18 to 20 terawatt hours. An international team of researchers with the participation of the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI) confirms these dimensions in the journal Nature Climate Change: When hydrogen-based fuels are used instead of direct electrification by e-cars and heat pumps, the required amount of electricity increases by two to four times. "Synthetic fuels are far too valuable and scarce to be burned in passenger cars or heaters. There are much better alternatives with direct electrification," says co-author Christian Bauer of PSI. Use is limited The scientists therefore recommend that hydrogen and synthetic fuels be used as a priority where electrification is unlikely to be possible. According to the authors, the share of energy in this sector is one fifth in the industrialised countries. These include the steel and chemical industries, where high temperature processes are in demand, the long-distance flying industry and shipping, where battery technology reaches its limits. That's what the cost is. In order to avoid one tonne of CO2, the researchers calculate that today about 878 Swiss francs would have to be paid for liquid or 1317 Swiss francs for gaseous synthetic fuels – even if hydrogen is produced with 100 percent cheaper and excess renewable energy. With technological progress and a large-scale increase in demand, the cost of prevention could fall to around 22 and 296 Swiss francs by 2050. Furthermore, the authors fear a lock-in effect. This means that those who rely on a large-scale use of hydrogen risk an extended dependence on fossil fuels. Hydrogen is not yet produced in a large way from excess renewable energy. Especially not the synthesis of fuels such as methane. In the new energy perspectives 2050+ of the federal government, it is said that synthetic fuel and hydrogen would play a more important role only from 2045 onwards. "A hydrogen infrastructure has to be built first," says ZHAW researcher Jürg Rohrer. Delaying the exit from fossil energy would not be in the sense of the Paris climate agreement, whose goal can only be achieved, according to climate researchers, if greenhouse gas emissions worldwide are reduced by at least half over the next ten years. This also applies to Switzerland, which wants to halve its emissions by 2030. "I think that's too expensive" Nevertheless, Empa researcher Christian Bach says: without domestic hydrogen production, it's not possible. "It is system-relevant, otherwise the addition of photovoltaics is not to the desired extent." He explains this with the demand in the summer: Hydropower alone will largely cover Switzerland's electricity needs. This means that without hydrogen production, there would be no use for a significant part of the photovoltaic current in the summer. "Since our neighbouring countries also invest heavily in photovoltaics, this electricity will probably not be exported in the future," says Bach. All regions in Central Europe would have too much or too little electricity at the same time. Still the winter current. Water and solar power alone are unlikely to meet demand once the last nuclear power plant is off the grid. The idea is to convert synthesized methane back into, for example, combined heat and power plants in the summer. Christian Bach is skeptical: "I do not think that domestic seasonal electricity storage is realistic, because it is too expensive." The import of synthetic methane will certainly be cheaper and cheaper.