A perfidious plan Civics want to lower the fuel price through the back door. That would be a poison to trust in politics. Stefan Häne The new CO2 law increases the price of gasoline and diesel by 12 cents per litre, warns the opponents in the ongoing voting fight. They thus suggest that this price increase should be applied to a yes to the submission on 13 May. ==References====External links== But that's wrong. The right thing is that importers will have to compensate for a growing proportion of CO2 emissions from fuels with climate protection projects in the future. By 2024, they can increase the price of petrol and diesel by a maximum of 10 centimetres per litre, and by a maximum of 12 centimetres from 2025 onwards. However, it is not yet clear how high the surcharge will be effective. It will be crucial to see how the price for CO2 compensation is developing. And whether the importers pass the climate protection costs completely on to their customers. In fact, the maximum possible increase is only 10.5 rappen. Because 1.5 rappen the importers already beat on the fuel price because of the existing compensation obligation. But these are subtleties that go down in the noise of the vote. The opponents obviously want to awaken the anger of the drivers. They hope for the birth of a yellow vest movement like in France, which will give the government a bill of thought, angry at an intensified climate policy, consumed by the Corona crisis. Accordingly, they make noise around the 12 bars – knowing that even this increase would be in the range of natural price fluctuations. The whole Perfidie is not yet disclosed. In parliament, bourgeois forces are working to reduce fuel prices with a tax-political trick. The effect of the CO2 law would thus in fact be evaporated. The advance from SVP circles will only be negotiated after the forthcoming referendum. At present, it looks like a yes to the new CO2 law. If parliamentarians were to de facto put an end to the referendum shortly after the ballot, it would be a poison to trust in politics.