Voted on 13 March. June: CO? law: What you need to know about it An alliance of oil and car industry has taken the referendum against the CO2 law. The best explanatory texts, interviews and opinions to submit. Stefan Häne A road sign stood at the entrance to the A 2 motorway in Mendrisio in 2019. Due to increased smog values, driving was forbidden at over 80 km/h. The most important articles This is what Switzerland has committed itself to halving its greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared to 1990 levels. At least three-quarters of the halving should be done domestically. The CO2 Act sets climate policy for 2030 and sets targets for transport, buildings and industry. The CO2 levy on oil and gas can rise from today's 96 Swiss francs to a maximum of 210 Swiss francs per tonne if emissions are not reduced quickly enough. The law also provides for a tax of 30 to 120 francs. Both taxes reward climate-friendly behaviour. The revenue should go to the population and the economy – and into a climate fund that supports building renovations, cushions the consequences of climate change and helps to develop climate-friendly technologies in the aviation industry. Gasoline and diesel could become more expensive. Newly, fuel importers have to compensate CO? emissions from fossil fuels by up to 90 percent with climate protection projects. They can cover the costs with fuel surcharges. Today, it is a maximum of 5 rapps per litre, and in the future it may be 10 to 12 rapps. Finally, increased CO2 limits make it difficult to replace oil and gas heating with a fossil heating system from 2023 onwards. Who's in favour? The Federal Council, all political groups except the SVP, the cantons, the municipal and municipal associations, environmental organisations, the mobility associations TCS and VCS, Economiesuisse and other business associations. According to supporters, the law strengthens climate protection, reduces dependence on foreign oil companies and creates jobs domestically. It creates a liberal framework, because it leaves companies room for manoeuvre and freedom of choice. Who's against it? Oil and car industry, SVP, Swiss homeowners' association, association of airfields, part of the building industry, Centre Patronal (Western Swiss Trade Association) – and part of the climate strike movement because the law does not go far enough Opponents argue that the cost of heating, mobility and flying is at a lower cost. The law was useless because Switzerland was insignificant to the world climate. And it was unfair because it burdened families, car commuters, the rural and mountain population, and business.