CO? emissions hardly fall: Switzerland misses national climate target 2020 In 2019, CO? emissions have hardly fallen. Switzerland is therefore not expected to meet the national climate target for 2020. Environmental organisations such as the WWF are outraged. In 2019, Switzerland received 46.2 million tonnes of CO? equivalents (CO?-eq), as the Federal Office for the Environment (Bafu) writes in its greenhouse gas inventory on Monday. This is 0.3 million tonnes less than in 2018 and 14 percent less than in 1990. Switzerland is therefore not expected to meet the national climate target for 2020 in transport, buildings, industry or agriculture. According to the Kyoto Protocol, however, the target would be a reduction of 20 percent compared to the base year 1990. And Switzerland will, in part, "according to today's assessment" clearly miss this. This would require more stringent measures, such as the new CO? law. Because the referendum was taken, the Swiss voter population will be elected on 13 March. ==References== Transport is the worst transport is the worst, which also contributed most to CO? pollution, namely 15 million tonnes of CO2-eq in 2019. This is even one percent more than in 1990. This clearly misses the target of minus 10 percent, the Bafu wrote. Although more efficient vehicles would have led to lower CO? emissions per kilometre. But because the number of miles travelled increased, this progress was destroyed again. Too many fossil fuels in the building sector, the reduction target is minus 40 percent compared to 1990. With 11.2 million tonnes of CO?-eq, Switzerland was only at minus 34 percent in 2019. In the year under review, CO? emissions did not decrease, mainly because of the colder winter. However, the strong influence of temperatures on emissions also shows that buildings in Switzerland continue to be heated to a significant extent with fossil fuels, the Bafu noted. At least the improved energy efficiency of buildings and the increasing replacement of oil and gas heaters with heat pumps and renewable energies have contributed to the fact that emissions did not increase compared to the previous year. But even if the cold effect is calculated, the trend is too low to achieve the reduction target. Industry and agriculture also missed goal In 2019, the industry remained "at a stable level" with an output of 11.2 million tonnes of CO?-eq. This is 14 percent less than in 1990. But the target is 15 percent and this is not achieved in the current trend either, the Bafu wrote. Agricultural emissions fell slightly to 6.5 million tonnes compared to the previous year and are now around 12 percent lower than in 1990. The emission of synthetic greenhouse gases, such as refrigerants, has also decreased slightly. But Switzerland will not achieve the reduction target of minus ten percent in this sector, even with a significant reduction in gas emissions. Environmental protection organisation shocked The organisation Climate Strike Switzerland showed itself in a press release "shocked" about the "marginal decline" of emissions. At this rate, Switzerland reaches the target of net zero greenhouse gas emissions in 154 years, as one activist is quoted in it. The policies and the corporations clearly disregarded the provisions of the Paris Agreement. In order to achieve the goal of a maximum global warming of 1.5 degrees, a "comprehensive system change that puts the well-being of people above the profit interests of the rich" is needed. The climate strike therefore calls for the 21st. ==References====External links== The environmental protection organization WWF also wrote that this could not continue. Hardly any country in Europe continues to use so many oil heaters and puts such a consumption-intensive new car fleet on the road year after year. In addition, Swiss people fly more than the residents of the neighbouring countries. For a sustainable reduction of CO? emissions, the targeted conversion of the "economic system based on fossil energies" is needed. That's exactly what the CO? law makes possible. This is the only way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50 percent by 2030.