SRG trend survey on votes: It's getting scarce for the agricultural initiatives In the latest survey, 54 percent voted for the drinking water and 55 percent for the pesticide initiative. However, this approval is relatively low for the present time. SDA Das nei: Voting poster on a field in Uebeschi BE. ==References====External links==* Official website The two agricultural initiatives are open to the public on 1 June. If the decision had fallen at the end of April, 54 percent of the drinking water and 55 percent of the pesticide initiative would have agreed. The three referendum proposals are also in favour. This resulted in the first wave of the SRG-SSR trend survey, which was published on Friday. In the SRG survey, the 54 percent of those who voted for the drinking water initiative were opposed to 40 percent. Six percent were still in the draw. The two agricultural initiatives and the three legislative proposals had already been approved in a Tamedia survey. However, a 54 percent approval value for an initiative at the beginning of a voting campaign was rather low, as political scientist Fabio Wasserfallen explained after the Tamedia survey: "Experience shows that people's initiatives start with a head start in the voting struggle, which then erodes the closer the voting date." (Read the complete analysis of the survey results.) The SRG survey shows a clear agreement in the left camp. In the middle, the GLP support is 73 percent for a yes. The supporters of the centre as a party want to vote no. FDP (54%) and SVP supporters (62%) are also opposed to popular demand. Large City-Land-Graben As usual, urbanists are more open to environmental concerns. However, the urban-land grave is larger than that between the sexes in the drinking water initiative: 65 percent want to vote in the cities, 41 in the countryside. Between women and men, the ratio is 57 to 52 percent. Pensioners are most likely to do so. The main argument is that there should be no more billions for agriculture that threatens the environment. In the survey, the initiative "for a Switzerland without synthetic pesticides" wanted to agree to 55 percent, 42 percent were against and 3 percent were undecided. The pattern of conflict is similar to that of the drinking water initiative. In addition to the health risk, it is important to argue that artificial pesticides are incompatible with sustainable agriculture. In opposition, the fear of higher food prices swings out. Majority for Covid and CO2 law In the Covid 19 law, which was opposed by the referendum, the first SRG survey gave a clear yes majority of 67 percent. 27 percent opposed it and 6 percent were in a draw. The intentions are political in the party and shaped by the confidence of the government. Refusal can be found in SVP-affins and government-critical. Even if all age groups are for submission, consent increases with age. The CO2 law wanted to accept 60 percent of the respondents. 35 percent said they were against it, and 5 percent were in a draw. The conflict pattern runs along the party lines. SVP supporters were most strongly opposed to the proposal. In addition, there were government critics. In general, the party people are behind the captured slogans, but in the FDP they are scarce. The argument that the template burdenes the middle class is even caught by the political opponent. For example, 42 percent of the SP voters polled agreed with him. With the Greens it was 27 percent. But this got really only in the middle-class environment. Conflict with the Anti-Terrorism Act The Act on Police Measures against Terrorism (Anti-Terrorism Act) had adopted 67 percent at the time of the survey. The largest share was in the middle party and the FDP, each with 82 percent. More critical of the government agreed to the proposal. In the No Camp, an elite-base conflict broke out: 52 per cent of the Greens and 55 per cent of the supporters of the SP want to agree to the law against the slogan of their parties. The gap at the GLP is really deep: 70 percent of the no-parole are opposed there. This means that the people's willingness to follow the government on "Law and Order" issues is intact. In the first wave of the SRG-SSR trend survey for the vote of 13 July, the SRG-SSR was re-elected. On June 19, the research institute gfs.bern surveyed between the 19th and 19th centuries. ==References== ==References====External links== The statistical error range is plus/minus 2.8 percentage points.