Analysis of the vote: Switzerland urgently needs this CO2 law The proposal is on the tip – it is as important as it is no longer in the long run. The law is balanced and affordable. Because climate protection is urgent, a yes is necessary. Stefan Häne The new CO? law helps to get away from fossil energies. This vote is undoubtedly one of the most important in recent years. Accordingly, the political struggle is hard. And dirty. The opponents of the CO? law operate with half-truths, which are supposed to awaken the people's zorn. For example, they warn of the fact that flies are becoming more expensive. However, keep in mind that one or two European flights per year remain in balance – because the population receives some of the revenue from the planned air ticket tax. (More information: Fact check – Is the CO? law a cost driver?) In addition, opponents claim that the law will cost the gasoline 12 cents a litre more. The right thing is that importers of petrol and diesel have to compensate for a growing proportion of the CO? emissions of these fuels with climate protection measures. For this purpose, they may transfer a maximum of 12 rapps per litre to the drivers. Whether they will do so is open. Today, the legal ceiling is 5 Rappen, realiter is 1.5 Rappen. Importers are therefore far from taking advantage of the scope today. The examples are revealing. Opponents try to portray the new law as a radical tool, designed by a political class that wants to pull money out of the people's pockets – and this at a delicate time: because of the Corona crisis, many people in the country have financial worries, and fears of the future are pressing on their minds. (Continue reading: Simonetta Sommaruga: "In a no to the CO? law, the oil industry is gaining") But this template is not radical. After a first attempt at the National Council at the end of 2018 had failed, the FDP adjusted its compass under the impression of the climate protests and upcoming elections, thus paving the way for a multiplicityable, punctually tightened template that now also includes large parts of the economy. The parliament acted tactically when it did not overload the law after the election victory of the green parties in autumn 2019. The bottom line is that the balanced template that is now available. The fact that it goes too little far for radical climate protectionists underlines its balance. On the one hand, the law builds on limits that are becoming increasingly stringent, for example when replacing fossil heating or new cars. It thus steers development in the desired direction: away from fossil energies. On the other hand, governance levies such as the carbon tax on fossil fuels and the tax on air tickets create incentives that reward climate-friendly behaviour. It is unsightly: in both cases, not all revenues are redistributed back to the population and the economy, which contradicts the idea of a real steering levy. That it is not the whole sum – this too is a political compromise. The rest of this revenue flows into a fund that promotes climate-friendly investments, such as charging stations for electric cars. Such state money pots are not unproblematic, they arouse the desire of many stakeholders and can, at worst, lead to unnecessary subsidies. Policymakers must therefore ensure that expenditure really benefits from climate protection and is subject to maximum transparency. Important intermediate step The opponents succeeded in making the climate policy template a question of wallet. They hit the sore point: A forced climate policy, along with winners, also produces losers. All in all, however, the law is quite social. Neither the Büezers nor the rural population is hit hardest. Rather, they are more financially sound households that live on a large scale ecologically. (On the subject: The CO? law punishes rich environmental offenders) And where serious social upheavals threaten, care is taken. For example, in the building sector, where the replacement of fossil heating is significantly complicated by a new oil or gas heating system. If homeowners lack the money for a more expensive fossil-free alternative (in the purchase, but not in the company), they can apply for financial assistance from the Climate Fund. In such cases, however, money must also flow; otherwise the acceptance of the new provision will disappear. There are other unpleasant facts. For example, even with complete independence from the oil industry, money will flow abroad in the future, for example because the raw materials for the production of solar panels are missing. So Switzerland will not become self-sufficient in energy. Furthermore, the problem is still unresolved, where Switzerland takes the electricity from a growing electrification of transport. However, the view of the whole must not be lost. Switzerland has committed itself internationally to halving its greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared to 1990. It is an eminently important intermediate step on the path to climate neutrality in 2050. Switzerland will not succeed without the tightening of the new law. This is also to be said at the address of those radical climate protectionists who are fighting the template. ==References== June mainly: loss of time. Until a new law was in place, years would pass. Whether it would be sharper would not be safe by any means. Climate protection is a race against time. It can't stand any more delays.