Banks hope for the CO2 law Support for initiative The financial centre is considered a climate polluter, but it does a lot to be considered green. Because that makes good money. Holger Alich and Jorges Brouzos It wasn't the big stage. But even though the Credit Suisse General Assembly was held without an audience, climate demonstrators tried to disrupt the occasion and raise awareness of their concerns there. According to the Swiss climate strike, the protest is said to be a «pretence for a hot summer against the climate-damaging financial centre». The banks, especially the two large banks, are a popular destination for climate demonstrators. Again and again, NGOs publish reports that show how dirty the institutions' assets are and how extensive the loans to controversial companies are. Industry supports law Banks, on the other hand, have long ceased to see themselves in the role of the Buhmann. "We want to set the industry standard for sustainability, with clear commitments for the benefit of people and our planet," recently promised Ralph Hamers, the new head of UBS. For the industry, the commitment to more sustainability is not a threat. Rather, good business attracts. Therefore, the banks are in favour of the CO2 Act. The Bankers' Association welcomes the fact that the law provides greater transparency in financial flows and incentives for building renovations for homeowners. "The banks support their customers in financing sustainable renovations and building," explains a spokesperson for the bankers' association. In English: The banks hope to sell additional mortgages. In addition, asset management customers increasingly demand sustainable investment products. This too is a promising business. The CO2 Act generally states that financial flows must be reconciled with efforts to limit temperature increases. The Financial Supervision Finma is supposed to look at the actors' finger at whether they have no climate risks in the balance sheets – for example, that an investment in a coal mine suddenly loses value because policymakers drive the CO2 price up significantly. PR and reality "Currently, we are working on how the finma intends to fulfil the reporting obligation under CO2 law from 2022 onward," says a spokesman for the supervisor. The finma already sees the review of financial climate risks as part of its task. "All major financial risks – including those related to climate change – are covered by current supervisory law," the speaker continues. The insurance companies are in favour of the law anyway. The damage caused by natural disasters can be gigantic, which directly affects them. Therefore, the Swiss Insurance Association is also involved in the committee "Swiss Economy for the CO2 Act". The financial industry as a climate saver? Claim and reality do not yet fit together despite all PR and promises. This is demonstrated by the climate compatibility test, which the Federal Office for the Environment regularly organises, as last November. "The Swiss financial sector as a whole is not yet geared towards the objectives of the Paris Convention," the study concludes. 179 financial companies participated in the test, including the large banks. However, the bank's credit books were not yet part of the survey, but the investments in shares and corporate bonds were nevertheless. "Companies are still financing too much coal mining and electricity generation. And they do not finance the expansion of renewable energies too much," explains Fiona Spuller of the 2-degree investment initiative, which is one of the main authors of the study. For example, 80 percent of the participating financial companies were still invested in coal mines. "Many institutes officially exclude coal companies in their investment policy, but this exclusion policy is often incomplete, for example, that companies are excluded only if they make more than 30 percent of their turnover with coal," she says. Coal electricity in the ESG fund 20 percent of the securities portfolios examined were managed according to so-called ESG criteria – i.e. environmental standards, social criteria and those for correct corporate management. "When an investor buys an ESG fund, this is not a guarantee that the fund's investment policy is compatible with the objectives of the Paris Climate Agreement," warns Spooler. "We have discovered ESG portfolios that contain coal power providers." However, the test does not mention individual institutes by name. And big bank representatives reject the criticism. According to the UBS Sustainability Report, only $5.4 billion is invested in heavily carbon-intensive industries such as coal, which is 1.9 percent of all balance sheet items. Credit Suisse is 4.5 percent higher here. If all climate-sensitive banking groups are combined, i.e. also in sectors such as chemistry, cement or aviation, UBS' positions total 38.7 billion dollars – which is even higher than in 2019.