Questions and answers about the CO? law: For which households does housing become more expensive, who benefits? The new CO2 Act provides for higher prices for oil and gas and promotes climate-friendly heating. What this means for homeowners and tenants. Stefan Häne Anyone who heats fossil-free does not pay for CO2 emissions: Sensors measure the temperature and air quality in a passive house in underwater. If Markus Meier talks about the new CO 2 law, there is always one remark: "too high a cost". Meier is the director of the Swiss House Owners' Association (HEV), which was founded on 13 December 1895. The Commission is proposing a 'no' to the proposal on June 5,. According to the Federal Council's own statements, the association supports the efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. However, the revised law suggests a pace that is incompatible with the renewal cycles in the building sector, says Meier. This creates a high cost pressure. "This is not financially viable for many homeowners." Is the concern justified? Or is it fear-making, as the advocates say? What's changing? In the future, new buildings must no longer cause CO2 emissions. The law thus states what is already standard today in most cases. Oil and gas heating may continue in existing houses. However, if they are replaced, a new upper limit for CO2 emissions will apply: 20 kilograms of CO2 per square metre of heated area. The value drops by 5 kilograms every five years. There is no need for renovation. However, sustainable heating increases the value of real estate. Building owners can decide for themselves how to reach the limit. For example, they can switch to solar heat or renewable fuels such as biogas. The installation of a fossil heating system is difficult, but not prohibited. According to the Federal Office for Energy (SFOE), for example, most buildings can reach limit values of 20 or 15 kilograms with solutions that combine a heat pump and a fossil heating system. Opponents criticise the new law for imposing renewable heating systems – regardless of whether they are technologically meaningful. When does the tightening apply? From 2023. More time is given to those eleven cantons on course with their own energy laws in the building area, such as Basel-Stadt. And five other cantons, which will probably fulfil this condition until the new CO? law enters into force, including Zurich. The new limit values will apply to them from 2026 onwards. In 2019, the buildings in Switzerland received around 34 percent less CO? In the 1990 base year. Progress is obvious. However, the building sector will probably miss the federal target for 2020 – a 40 percent decline. Will homeowners get more expensive? That depends on how you calculate. Climate-friendly heating systems are cheaper over the entire service life, mainly thanks to lower energy costs. However, investment costs are often higher. A new UBS study shows that replacing an oil heater with a heat pump can pay off in 10 to 15 years, for example when the heating is at the end of its life and the house is poorly insulated – without subsidies. 5 to 10 years longer is the payback period, however, if the house is well insulated and the old heating could run for 10 years. Climate-friendly heating systems are cheaper over the entire service life: heat pump with a pair in Laupen. The opponents argue that the only decisive factor for a residential owner is "the immediate and fully-fledged investment volume". Depending on the scope of the renovation work, HEV Director Meier speaks of a total cost of CHF 50.000, sometimes even more than 100,000 – all of which is significantly more expensive than the one-to-one use of oil or gas heating. The SFOE responds that these are extreme examples. The installation of a heat pump is possible from about 25,000 Swiss francs, a pellet heating cost about 25,000 Swiss francs, a district heating connection about 10,000 Swiss francs. Is there any money from the state? Yeah. House owners receive a new scrapping premium from the federal government for heating replacement, which is a maximum of CHF 5000. There are another 1500 francs if they want to carry out an energy consultation. In addition, contributions from the Federal Building Programme and cantonal funding programmes are included. The Canton of St. Gallen, for example, is paying a contribution of 6,000 francs to a heat pump as a replacement for fossil heating this year. In addition, homeowners can deduct the remaining costs from taxable income. Pensioners as losers? Especially for older people, the new law according to the homeowners' association can become a problem, because they still often heat with oil or gas and their house is not usually top insulated. "They will then have to raise a new mortgage depending on the existing debt." For the replacement of heating, they will have to take a lot of money into their hands again on their life-end, without the investment expecting – money that is often not available, says HEV director Meier. "You will then have to raise a new mortgage depending on the existing debt. Hope for a lottery win. Or sell their house." The SFOE replied that in such cases, the climate fund would come to the fore. This is the new pot filled with money from the CO2 levy on fuels and the – planned – ticket tax. The Climate Fund can protect banks and investors against risks if they finance the climate-friendly renovation of buildings. This also allowed for the financing of hardship cases, for example if homeowners had trouble getting a mortgage, the SFOE said. The owners could also conclude a contracting with an energy service provider, so that they could modernise their house energetically without having to take money into their own hands. Are the rents going up? Like the Swiss Tenant Association, the SFOE assumes that the costs for the tenantship will hardly change as a result of a replacement of heating. The SFOE refers to a study by Wüest Partner from 2020. Accordingly, climate-friendly renovations and heating replacements, especially in older buildings, can even reduce the total cost of the tenant. In other cases, the consequences of climate-friendly measures for the tenant company are marginal: the investments could be partly transferred to the rental interest, but at the same time the additional costs for the tenant company would also be deducted. Climate-friendly renovations and heating replacements could lead to lower costs for tenants in older buildings: Old Town Houses in Winterthur. HEV Director Meier, on the other hand, refers to an older study by the SFOE in 2015. The conclusion at the time: Energetic renovations in most cases lead to an additional burden for tenants, even taking into account the reduced energy costs. The SFOE replied that important parameters had changed since then and that energy systems had become cheaper. Oil and gas price rise? Fuel oil and gas can become more expensive with the new law – but only if CO2 emissions in the building sector do not fall as quickly as the federal government requires; the opponents say that the lowering path is so ambitious that increases are practically unavoidable. In this case, the Federal Council may increase the CO2 levy on fuels by the maximum rate of tax from 120 to a maximum of 210 francs per tonne. A first step could be taken in 2024: from 96 today to 145 francs. The surcharge per litre of fuel oil then cheats about 38 rappen, 13 rappen more than today, at a price of around 70 rappen per litre. 87 francs per year – and in the future? Of the 1.6 million residential buildings in Switzerland, a good 1 million are still heated with gas or oil. If the homeowner continues to rely on oil or gas, the tenant must expect higher energy costs. However, if CO2 emissions rise, it will also get back more than today. Two-thirds of the levy goes back to the population and the economy, which currently accounts for 87 francs per capita. With the new law, it is expected to be 107 francs. Whether a tenant ultimately has to pay on it or not, can not be answered in a lump sum with yes or no. The SFOE stresses that the energy costs for the tenant company only accounted for about half of the incidental costs of typically around 200 francs. And the smaller part of this goes back to the CO2 levy. Is it the homeowners? Higher energy costs threaten those homeowners who continue to fuel fossils. However, the invoice depends heavily on the assumptions made. For a family of four, who lives in a single family house with 130 square meters of space and a heating oil requirement of 2000 litres per year, the CO2 levy will be used up to a maximum of CHF 600 per year. The association assumes a consumption of 15 litres per square meter. This corresponds to the standard in 44 percent of the buildings. The SFOE, on the other hand, speaks of 8 litres per square meter, which would consume average housing. As calculated, the premium is 312 francs. In any case, the family of four will receive money from the CO2 levy on fuels, currently 348 Swiss francs, and in the future it is expected to be 428 Swiss francs. In the example of the SFOE, the bottom line would be a profit, in the example of the HEV a – albeit smaller – loss. Who's sure to benefit? All those households that heat fossil-free. As early as 2017, four out of ten households did not pay for CO2 emissions. In several rural cantons, the majority of households are already fossil-free. At the top is Uri (60.4 percent), followed by Obwalden (59.3) and Appenzell Innerrhoden (55.9). Are all homeowners against the law? Nope. Casafair, which is known as the association for environmentally conscious homeowners, recommends a yes