How Petra Gössi wants to save her eco-course CO2 law The FDP President is stepping up her efforts to convince her skeptical party base of the CO2 law. Whether the CO2 law was the referendum of 13 July. It seems uncertain that the representative survey of Tamedia/20 minutes recently only reached 50 percent of the vote. What was particularly noticeable was the skepticism of the FDP base. According to the survey, it rejects the law at 61 percent. For the group and the delegates who recommend a yes, that would be a disavouing. And especially for party president Petra Gössi. Gössi and her team now want to increase efforts to convince the suspicious party people. As the Schwyzerin announces on request, an advertising campaign will soon be launched in the NZZ media. "We assume that we will achieve the FDP voters so well." The supporters are also supposed to intensify their «media work» on the Internet. The President himself will make an appeal via roundmail to all party members. There's a lot at stake for Gössi. It was she who decreed an "eco-turn" to her party in spring 2019, thanks to which the CO2 law came into being at all. Of course, the realignment was never disputed. A critic of the first hour is the Bernese National Councillor Christian Wasserfallen. The new survey confirms him: "The CO2 law means redistribution, state industrial policy, massive bureaucracy and new taxes. This solution is neither liberal nor mature. That's why the CO2 law is resisting free-minded voters." Waterfalls assume that an FDP no on 13 May 2011 is a threat to the public. ==References====External links==* Official website "There will be many questions. We have to think about how we can get back to the liberal track."Fear of the "identity crisis" Peter Metzinger, FDP politician from the canton of Zurich, believes that a success of the opponents could change a lot. But he expects nothing good from these changes. Metzinger, who has been committed to environmental policy for years, fears a "identity crisis", should the FDP crash the CO2 law. He says: "The party president will lose support, one will want to reverse the eco-return – and much more of our voters will move to the green liberals." Metzinger finds the survey result "confused". In personal conversations, he hardly feels any opposition to Gössi's course. The internal opposition is, of course, loud, active and active. But above all Metzinger believes that the "lie campaign" of the SVP has an effect. "The SVP wants to divide us. It spreads false information, especially about the cost of the CO2 law, and insecures our people."A crash of the proposal, Metzinger fears, would be fatal not only for the party, but also for the democratic debate. Petra Gössi himself gives himself to all this forehand. "We already had similar debates on energy strategy or other issues such as paternity leave," the President says. "They are of the free will."