«It is too early to ask the guilt question» Controversial CO2 law Resistance to the proposal is greater than expected – not least because some of the climate activists reject it. Green National Council Bastien Girod says how to win the vote. Stefan Häne Mr Girod, how much is your fear that the voters will reject the CO2 law? According to the second Tamedia survey, approval is crumbling. Fear is the wrong word. But I'm worried because there's a lot at stake. ==References== June would be a disaster for climate protection. However, I am still convinced that the voter will approve the proposal. The opponents have managed to make the vote a question of wallet. The debate seems to me like this: our house is on fire and we are talking about whether the fire hose is a little too expensive. Or if we'd better wait and see if there might be a better fire truck coming by. With the fire truck, you're alluding to the part of the climate strike movement that rejects the law. So it would be the fault of people from the green camp to say no. It's too early to ask the guilt question. The criticism that you mention makes it certainly more difficult to arouse enthusiasm for the CO2 Act. The law is a great success for the climate change movement. Without the commitment of the climate strikers and the 2019 climate election, the law would not have come about that way. Until the vote, we must succeed in fuelling this enthusiasm. It could be too late for that. Radical climate protectionists have publicly dismissed the law, declaring politics incapable of solving the climate problem. You can ask me so many times: I do not commit self - carnage. The fact is that a no to the law would throw us back years in climate protection. In addition, a new proposal would certainly be less ambitious and less economical. An example: today, some companies can be freed from the CO2 levy on fossil fuels if they reduce their CO2 emissions in return – a measure that is now running out. By contrast, the new law would open this instrument to all companies. The Green Party is conspicuously holding back in the vote. Don't you want to upset your party's radical wing? No basis is as close to the law as ours; the polls show that. According to the Tamedia survey, one in ten Greens says no. This can be decisive if the outcome is tight. It may indeed be that every voice is decisive. We do everything we can to ensure that this is clear to everyone by the voting Sunday. This is a big task, because the opponents of the law are financially very well equipped, because foreign oil importers have great financial interests in a no. A figurehead like the opponents with SVP National Councillor Christian Imark does not have your side. We are much broader in terms of personnel. The lead is with the FDP. And with FDP-Ständerat Damian Müller, well-known exponents are also publicly involved. Only: Some say that a law that supports the FDP cannot be ambitious. The law is a compromise, but an ambitious one and more economical. Without the FDP, that would not have been possible. The party has taken a big step forward, and I can say that as President of the National Environment Commission. The cooperation with the free-minded was constructive. According to polls, a majority of the FDP base still rejects the law. The FDP has apparently not yet succeeded in convincing its base. There – and not in our camp – the key to success lies on 13 May. ==References== The SVP is trying to draw bourgeois doubters to its side with an alternative climate protection plan. Your actions are dishonest. In Parliament, the SVP has still said that the House is not burning and that it is not necessary to delete it. And now she says: There is another fire engine, that is, another climate protection. The present CO2 law is not the only way to increase climate protection... We simply don't have the time to turn everything upside down again. We have to accept the law, and then we can still make improvements. Switzerland is the first country in which the population is located through the Paris Climate Agreement. Accordingly, the signal we received on 13 March will be important. ==References== A "no" would weaken global climate protection and give global warming opponents a boost. Such moral appeals seem to draw less than the money question. Of course, we need to speak openly and honestly about the costs that the law brings – for each of us, but also for society. The opponents operate with extreme examples, that is perfid. Those who calculate correctly see that a large majority of households benefit financially from the law. Moreover, it is very much about questions such as those concerning the responsibility that Switzerland must assume. So such appeals are important. Bastien Girod wants to inspire enthusiasm for the CO law among the young: Climate strike on 21 January. ==References== Photo: Raphael Moser Bastien Girod National Council Green Climate Strike End in CO2 Act split 13 German-Swiss regional groups and the Ticino section are in favour of the new CO2 Act. The climate strike movement demands that Switzerland become climate neutral by 2030. By contrast, the law provides for a halving of greenhouse gas emissions compared to 1990. This is too little for Western Swiss climate strikers. They reject the law. The policy had still not recognized the urgency of the "climate crisis". (sda)