Gerhard Pfister Digital Assembly: Mitte says yes to CO2 law and no to agricultural initiatives The delegates decided at their virtual assembly on the slogans for five voting proposals. At the beginning, party president Gerhard Pfister stressed the party's responsibility for the cohesion of Switzerland. ij/SDA «The Covid-19 law is a law of the center. We have shaped it considerably in Parliament»: Gerhard Pfister at the delegates' meeting in the centre. The centre delegates have submitted to all five proposals of the referendum of 13 July. They say yes to the CO2 Act, the Covid 19 Act and the Anti-Terror Act. They recommend the drinking water and pesticides initiative to be rejected. This was decided by the delegates at their virtual meeting on Saturday. The delegates voted for the CO2 Act by a majority. "The law is a good compromise," declared Stefan Müller-Aldermatt (SO). The law contained measures that were socially and economically balanced. "We are taking a step towards an energy supply that is clean, safe and still affordable," he said. Delegates recommend that the voters reject the referendum against the law on the urn. The same applies to the referendum against the Act on Police Measures to Combat Terrorism (PMT). The delegates voted in favour of the law by a large majority. The law complements Switzerland's anti-terrorism instruments through preventive measures by the police. The centre does not want protection for perpetrators, but a secure Switzerland, said Vice President and National Councillor Ida Glanzmann (LU). The Covid-19 Act received virtually undisputed support. The Covid-19 law was necessary, argued National Councillor Ruth Humbel (AG). If all the support services were to fall there, this would be fatal for SMEs. Agricultural initiatives are too extreme The two agricultural initiatives provided a lot of talk. A majority of delegates considered the initiatives too extreme. They led to more expensive food and threatened Switzerland's livelihood by a decline in yields. According to National Councillor Priska Wismer-Felder (LU), both initiatives neglect economic and social aspects. "Such a radical change is not sustainable," she said. The center stands for walkable steps. Wismer-felder dueled in a panel discussion with Green National Councillor Regula Rytz (BE). It was the first delegates' meeting as a "Middle" party after the merger of CVP and BDP last November. A little over 200 delegates participated in the online event. Pfister: Centre for Cohesion At the beginning of the delegates' meeting, party president Gerhard Pfister stressed the party's responsibility for the cohesion of Switzerland. Especially in times of the Covid-19 pandemic and the increasing polarization in the world, a strong center was called for and a consensus policy that balanced out. The fact that the centre was ready to take responsibility showed how to deal with the Corona crisis. "The Covid-19 law is a law of the middle. We have had a significant impact on this in Parliament and we will be fully engaged until the vote on 13 March. "We're going to have to work on it," Pfister explained. For the future, he demanded that the consequences of the pandemic should not be at the expense of premium payers. The economic dependence on international supply chains on essential goods should also be reduced. "Security of supply must be better guaranteed in future crises and the sustainable economy of Switzerland must be strengthened," Pfister said. Federal Council to renegotiate with the EU With regard to the negotiations of the framework agreement with the EU, Pfister stressed the importance of a "majority-capable institutional framework agreement". For the centre, for example, this means explicitly excluding the EU citizen's directive and finding a solution to the accompanying measures without avoiding wage protection. Pfister therefore sees the Federal Council as a duty to show responsibility and to renegotiate for Switzerland. "We want to find a good way with our most important partner. It is in our mutual interest to avoid escalation," Pfister said.