Voted on 13 March. June: Strong support to the economy for the CO2 Act Economiesuisse and around 200 companies and business associations oppose the alliance of oil industry, road associations and chimney sweeps. SDA Wide circles of the Swiss economy support the CO2 law adopted by Parliament. Economiesuisse and around 200 companies and business associations are thus opposed to the alliance from the oil industry, road associations and chimney sweeps. ==References== The Swiss voters voted on the revised CO2 Act on June 5. This is because an economic committee – supported by the trade and homeowners' association and the SVP – has brought about the referendum against the proposal. However, a large part of the economy is committed to the CO2 Act, the Committee on the Swiss Economy for the CO2 Act announced on Monday. This includes Swissbanking, the Swiss Insurance Association, Construction Switzerland, AEE Suisse and Suissetec, as well as companies such as the chemical group BASF and the reinsurer Swiss Re. The committee is led by the Economiesuisse Economic Association. "Good Swiss compromise" The climate crisis is a major challenge for Switzerland, writes the Economic Committee. The Swiss economy is aware of this, wants to take responsibility and act. If nothing happens, the cost of climate damage will increase. "A no is not an option, it means a standstill and would throw Switzerland far back in climate protection," it says. The revised CO2 law offers great opportunities for the Swiss economy, according to the supporters, "which is present with many wise and effective solutions to the climate crisis". The new law works with incentives, orients itself on measures with steering effect and thus provides for investments and jobs in Switzerland. The proposal was "a good Swiss compromise", it continues. In particular, the business representatives welcome the fact that the majority of the steering levies are to be redistributed back to the population. In addition, Swiss companies received collateral with the Climate Fund to bring climate-friendly technologies to the market more quickly.