Citizens want cheaper petrol Parliamentary initiative If the CO2 proposal were adopted in June, fossil fuels would cost more. At the same time, economic policymakers are forging plans that would reverse this. Stefan Häne and Angelika Gruber Petrol and diesel would only be about half as expensive at the petrol station today if the state did not increase taxes and surcharges on it. In addition, the whole fuel price is subject to VAT, including taxes and surcharges. Civic National Councils are disturbed by the fact that "the state imposes taxes on taxes". A corresponding parliamentary initiative by National Councillor Franz Grüter (SVP) has found a majority in the National Economic Commission. Now the sister commission is on the train in the Council of States. It is about a lot of money: the state loses about CHF 300 million a year in implementing the initiative, as Grüter's proposal shows. Gasoline and diesel would be about 7 cents per litre cheaper. The advance is explosive. ==References== The vote will take place on June 15, 2014. With a yes of the Swiss, the prices of petrol and diesel are expected to rise somewhat gradually. Because then the oil companies would have to do more for climate protection – and that costs. The amount of the surcharge is still unclear The law provides that fuel sellers must compensate for a higher proportion of their petrol and diesel imports into Switzerland with climate protection projects. To achieve this, they purchase certificates from climate protection projects validated by the federal government. The costs may be passed on to consumers: a maximum of 12 bars per litre. Oil companies already compensate for a good tenth of CO2 emissions. The surcharge at the petrol station is currently around 1.5 rappen per litre, and it should be 5 rappen at the maximum according to the current law. But in the future, importers will have to compensate for up to 90 percent of the CO2 emissions. WWF expert Patrick Hofstetter expects that this will add around 5 centimetres per litre of petrol or diesel in the coming years. By 2030, the plus could be up to 10 raps. "The amount depends on how expensive it will be to compensate one tonne of CO2 in climate protection projects, and whether the oil companies will completely pass these costs on to their customers," says Hofstetter. The law only sets the maximum surcharge. And there is yet another reason for higher fuel prices: The oil companies are obliged to implement a growing share of climate protection projects domestically. But in Switzerland, climate protection projects are usually more expensive than abroad. So compensation in this country is also more expensive, which in turn is likely to affect fuel prices. It is open to what extent the service station operators will pass on the higher costs. Individual oil companies have to be heard, which also depends on the development of the market. Consent for "general logic" But the association of the oil companies Avenergy leaves no doubt that petrol and diesel will be triggered by environmental projects. "It would be an illusion to believe that someone else pays for it than consumers," says Avenergy CEO Roland Bilang. The bourgeois plans for a price reduction would thus more or less destroy the effect of the CO2 law. The economic politicians in the Council of States probably decide on the delicate question at the beginning of July, i.e. after the vote on the CO2 Act. For tactical reasons? President Christian Levrat (SP). The Commission had not yet been able to deal with the request, as it had been heavily burdened by the Covid 19 Act. In terms of content, Levrat does not want to comment on this before the meeting. Anders Martin Schmid. The FDP stand supports the advance, namely "out of general logic". He is not primarily concerned with reducing the burden on drivers, as he makes clear, but with the principle: "Taxes and taxes should never be subject to VAT." If there are even other areas where this is the case, this would also have to be corrected there. This is precisely what Erich Ettlin (The Middle) warns: "We would create a prejudication that would immediately lead to more tax failures in other places." Adèle Thorens (Greens) finally speaks of a "bad signal" for climate policy, whose aim is to reduce the consumption of petrol and diesel. Another question is whether rising fuel prices cause motorists to travel less miles. They hardly react to a 10 percent price increase. This is shown by a study written by the consulting firm Infras 2019. In the short term, demand for petrol and diesel is reduced by about 2 percent, and by 3 percent in the following years. The steering effect would therefore be rather modest. It would be even smaller with the new CO2 law, as the surcharge on a maximum of 12 raps represents less than 10 percent of the current fuel price. It is interesting to note that the price of petrol and diesel varies one way or another – and this is partly stronger than now planned by the CO2 Act. In 2016, for example, a litre of petrol cost CHF 1.48, now 22 more rags. Various facts play into it, such as the price of oil or the dollar's exchange rate to the franc. Today, 60 Rapfen would have to cost more Starting with the Infras study, Philippe Thalmann, holder of the Chair of Urban and Environmental Economics at ETH Lausanne, has made an interesting calculation. According to this, the fuel price should have increased by about 40 percent in recent years in order to achieve Switzerland's climate target for transport, i.e. a 10 percent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions compared to 1990. As of 2019 it was only plus 1 percent, newer data are not available. Instead of the actual average price of CHF 1.60 in 2019, one litre of petrol should have cost CHF 2.20. "That may sound like a lot," says Thalmann, "but the price should not have been increased from one day to the next by 60 centimetres." Not only the amount of the bonus is important, but also the time factor. A permanent impact can lead drivers to adapt to the new events – even if it is not lush. Either they drive less, buy a more efficient vehicle, or switch to cheaper means of transport. "It could well be that this accelerates the switch to electric vehicles," says ETH professor Anton Gunzinger. These are already cheaper in a full cost calculation, and with a higher fuel price electromobility is even better.