Tax for overseas flights at a low cost CO2 law The planned air ticket tax disproportionately meets economy passengers for short-haul flights, as a new study shows. It is open to how much it can help to reduce air traffic. Stefan Häne and Martin Läubli Heisst the voters on 13 March. The CO2 law is good for June, and flying becomes more expensive. The levy is between 30 and 120 francs. Their exact design is not yet fixed. But the Federal Council has made a proposal: 30 francs for a short-haul flight, 60 francs for a medium-haul flight, 90 francs for a long-haul flight. In addition, an additional surcharge of 30 Swiss francs for all premium classes, i.e. all over economy. As is now shown, these levies are not fairly distributed. This is the result of a new study by the E4S Center, in which ETH and the University of Lausanne and the Institute for Management Development (IMD) are involved. The authors estimate that 30 francs for an economy short-haul flight corresponds to an average price increase of 19 percent of the airline ticket. If this increase is transferred proportionally to an economy long-haul flight, the levy would have to be increased from 90 francs to 133 francs. It is even crazier in the premium class, where the average increase would have to be 870 francs. These calculations are relevant in that, according to the study, only about 20 percent of all passengers are long-haul aircraft, but these flights produce 60 percent of the total emissions from air travel. "The ticket tax of 30 francs for short-haul flights Economy is quite happy compared to the other categories," says lead author Philippe Thalmann of the EPFL. If this minimum levy were lower, the increase in the other categories could be "more just," the economist said. In other countries this is the case. In the United Kingdom, for example, it amounts to only 17 francs. For Thalmann, however, the difference in the rate of increase per travel category is not a priority. "I would be glad if the climate impact were better illustrated in the tax," he says. Warming or cooling It is not just CO2 emissions that have a warming effect on the atmosphere. The combustion of kerosene in aircraft engines also produces nitrogen oxides, sulphur dioxide, steam, soot particles and unburned hydrocarbons. These gases and fine particles have a warming or cooling effect. The bottom line, as a new study shows in the journal "Atmospheric Environment", is that the climate effect of the emitted gases corresponds to about three times the amount of CO2 emissions. In terms of the climate impact of greenhouse gas emissions in Switzerland, the new study states that air traffic is about 27 percent, making it the most important source – even before ground traffic. If the air ticket tax reflects the climate effect, the planned charges would have to be corrected: The price for a long-haul economy would have to rise from the planned 90 to 150 francs, because its climate effect is five times stronger on average compared to a short-haul flight (30 francs). Those who book first class and thus claim a larger place in the aircraft would have to pay 450 francs more. The reason: The luxury class, in turn, produces a three times stronger climate effect than the economy and is 15 times more effective than a short-haul economy. How do politicians react to the findings of the new study? ==References====External links== June – if there is a yes to the law – push for an increase in the ticket tax? SP Group leader Roger Nordmann beckons: "That would not be fair to the voting people." It was important to wait first to see how the tightened CO2 law would work – precisely those instruments that were new like the ticket levy. According to Nordmann, his party agreed on this compromise with the FDP, the centre, the Greens and the Green Liberals. The Greens and the Green Liberals are already announcing their intention to increase prices in the medium term. The Greens even call it a date: from 2023. Is there enough incentives? Another question is whether the levy creates enough incentives to fly less. Based on an earlier study by the Centre E4S, the Federal Office for the Environment (Bafu) expects passengers to fall by up to 20 percent and CO2 emissions by up to 11 percent. However, it is open whether the steering effect will actually occur to the extent hoped for. According to the plans of the Federal Council, airlines should be able to reduce the air ticket tax by 20 percent, provided they reduce their CO2 emissions by 8 percent – for example by mixing synthetic aviation fuels (SAF) or more efficient aircraft. The proposal is, however, controversial. Swiss considers the financial relief to be too small to compensate for the additional costs incurred, SAF being three to six times more expensive than fossil fuel. Nor was it possible in the short term to obtain the necessary quantities, as there was not yet enough of SAF. The Climate Fund, which is based on 49 percent of the revenue from the airline tax, is also intended to contribute. This money – the federal government expects a total of about 0.5 billion Swiss francs per year – is intended to support climate-friendly investments. According to Bafu, this also includes pilot plants for synthetic aviation fuels, so that they become marketable. However, it is still unclear how much money will flow in the aviation industry overall. Swiss criticises this: it demands that the proceeds from the air ticket levy in the Climate Fund should be fully used by aviation. Anthony Patt, Professor of Climate Policy at ETH Zurich, also shares this view: "It is now important to secure the demand for synthetic fuels." This will not achieve an increase in the price of aircraft tickets alone. The difference between the price of fossil fuels and synthetic fuels is far too large to establish a politically acceptable CO2 levy. "It takes all the revenue from the ticket tax to reduce the price of synthetic fuels," says Patt. The use of synthetic fuel currently seems to be the only viable way to make aviation CO2 neutral in the long term. Patt would prefer the solution of the EU Commission, which might come with a proposal in the coming months: According to this, fuel suppliers at each EU airport should ensure that 2 percent of the kerosene is produced synthetically – preferably on the basis of hydrogen. This contribution is to be continuously increased and the share should be 5 percent in 2030. The costs are to be borne by airlines, i.e. passengers. The effect of steering ultimately depends on the extent to which passengers will bypass the delivery. For this, they would not even have to travel far: the binational airport Basel-Mulhouse is located on French soil. France has been levying a tax on flights since 2020. However, the surcharge of between EUR 1.50 and 18 in the French airport sector is significantly lower than it would be in the Swiss sector in the future. Airlines could easily change the sector, which would be a purely administrative matter. Discussions are ongoing Environment Minister Simonetta Sommaruga has announced that she will negotiate a solution with the French authorities. Discussions are ongoing at the level of the binational board, where the regions concerned and the national authorities are represented. However, effective negotiations are conceivable at the earliest, according to the Federal Office for the Environment, if after the 13th century. It is clear from June that the tax on air tickets will be introduced. Whether Basel-Mulhouse Hand offers a solution, however, is doubtful, since the airport is also in a tough competition, even in inner French – for example with Strasbourg or Lyon. But the steering effect may also be completely blurred – at least in the case of Swiss flights. CEO Dieter Vranckx recently announced: "The market mechanisms will not allow the airline tax to be passed on to passengers."