Debate Guest contribution Climate justice goes to all of us Switzerland is privileged when it comes to the effects of climate change. It should be in solidarity. Rupa Mukerji Climate justice? Nasima Begum does not know this term. The 30-year-old lives with her husband and two children in Khulna District in Bangladesh. Here climate change hits the poorest particularly hard. Cyclones and sea level rise have led to flooding and salting the soil. People in the region can reap only once a year instead of twice as before. With agriculture, you can't make ends meet, people have to leave their villages – in search of work, often in places where there are no schools. So they get into a spiral of poverty. So Nasima Begum and her husband had to find a new way to survive. Since then, they've been working in a brick distillery. They hope to earn enough to build a house and give their children a better future. This is a case of innumerable people who bring climate injustice to the point: Nasima Begum and her ancestors, with their modest lifestyle, have a minimum carbon footprint and thus contributed nothing to the causes of global warming. Nevertheless, they are disproportionately and existentially affected: on the one hand, due to the geographical situation – Bangladesh is increasingly suffering from floods, rising sea levels and at the same time droughts – and on the other hand, because they do not have the resources and know-how to adapt to the effects of the climate crisis. This affects millions of people in the global south. Conversely, Switzerland and other industrialised nations have less to contend with their consequences and can adapt better to them. And that, although for decades they have been mainly responsible for climate change with their greenhouse gas emissions. That's not fair. Climate justice has three dimensions. Firstly, a timeline: the present generation should take responsibility for future generations and reduce its own emissions. The second is geographical: the main causes of climate change should take responsibility and reduce their emissions and allow developing countries to eradicate poverty and adapt to climate change. The third dimension concerns the different carbon footprints of people within a country, while everyone has to bear the costs of the climate crisis. ==References====External links== ==References====External links==* Official website For NGOs like Helvetas, who are working on the basis, it is clear that sustainable development is only possible if climate and development goals are linked. That is why we include methods in our work that take into account the changing climate. We help people in the Andes, in the South Asian coastal regions and in Africa to use drought-resistant seeds and new cultivation methods to protect mangroves in coastal areas, to find access to clean drinking water. I am often referred to as overpopulation and climate change. The solution for both the climate and the population crisis is a fundamental level of development that is sustainable. Here too Bangladesh is a good example: the country has experienced a decline in fertility rate from 6.9 children per woman in 1971 to 2.03 children in 2015. A change that is unprecedented in a low-income country, achieved by women like Nasima Begum, who have taken control of their bodies and lives. Without being aware of it, it plays a role as part of the solution. It is time for us too to take responsibility for our actions. Rupa Mukerji Head of Advisory Services Department at Helvetas.