Guest commentary Doing nothing would be expensive The CO2 law is also about economic advantages by replacing the oil. Roger Nordmann The change of name was little exciting: "Avennergy Suisse is becoming a member of the Oil Association," it was announced in a press release in 2019. The story provided by a PR office was also boring and predictable: the new name with reference to "avenir" should underline the focus on the future. Looking back, however, it turns out that the exercise was strategically well thought out. Before the referendum against the CO2 law, the oil lobby wanted to cover up a new, inexhaustible camouflage coat. Because with the referendum against the CO2 law, the oil lobby obviously wants to protect its prunes as long as possible. It's not less than eight billion francs. This is the annual amount that Switzerland has spent on the import of fossil energy on average over the last ten years. This does not include mineral oil and value added tax. The most important objective of the CO2 Act is of course climate protection, i.e. the reduction of our greenhouse gas emissions. Switzerland thus fulfils its obligations under the Paris Climate Change Agreement. This is the only way that our planet remains worth living for future generations. However, ambitious climate protection policy also brings enormous economic benefits. The first advantage is the gradual reduction in oil expenditure. The CO2 Act reduces the bill for the import of fossil fuels from eight billion Swiss francs to around five billion Swiss francs by 2030. And then gradually moves towards zero. The second advantage: to get away from oil, more domestic investment is needed. Thus, a larger proportion of value added remains in Switzerland, and billions of oil-exporting countries are no longer leaving. We need to improve the energy efficiency of our equipment, buildings and infrastructures and produce more renewable energy. Switzerland will benefit from the fact that primary energy in the form of water, wind and sunshine will arrive free of charge in Switzerland. This is in contrast to oil barrels that have to be bought in expensively. The third economic advantage is that, with a limitation of global warming, the consequential costs are also lower. If the international community complies with its climate protection commitments, the temperature increase can still be limited – even if unfortunately it can no longer be completely avoided. However, in terms of prosperity and quality of life, every degree avoided counts. Conversely, every further degree of warming drives hundreds of millions of people to flee. Because sea levels are rising or whole regions become too hot and thus uninhabitable. In addition to human suffering, this would also result in a global economic crisis, with consequences for Switzerland as well. Although the fourth economic advantage is hard to quantify, it is no less important: reducing global oil consumption will also reduce the temptation to conquer this resource by military force. Most armed conflicts have to do with energy directly or indirectly. So if we get away from oil, the world will become a more peaceful place. The cost of failure would therefore be very high. If we cannot stop global warming and switch to sustainable energy production, it would be very expensive. Therefore, SP, Mitte, Greens, FDP and Green Liberals have agreed on an effective CO2 law in Parliament. Of course, this compromise does not solve all the problems. It can therefore only be a first step towards a future without fossil fuels. But it is a necessary and decisive step that must be taken without delay if we want to have a chance to win the fight against global warming.