Pilot gives his job for the climate From cockpit to climate protection Winterthurer Daniel Lüscher is only 53 and could fly even further. But now he has changed sides. What happened? Jigme Garne Lakes, on the outskirts of Winterthur: In a series of identical single-family houses, the Lüscher family house is easy to spot. It has more solar panels than all the others on the roof. In the open garage there is a pool table and three bicycles. "And my sledge," says Daniel Lüscher – he means his Davoser. He hasn't had a car in years. Daniel Lüscher saw as a pilot the damage caused by climate change; how the snow on the Montblanc became less and less and how the ice caps in the far north were fading. So he decided to do something about it, and he founded the citizens' initiative Myblueplanet. It has the message that everyone and everyone with their behaviour can contribute to climate protection. That was 15 years ago. «Everywhere Warning Lamps» Today, Myblueplanet is an established NGO with 15 employees and 150 volunteers engaged in educational programs and environmental campaigns in Winterthur and its surroundings. The impressively good story – pilot finds a green conscience – always depended on the flaw that the passionate professional pilot Lüscher continued to jettison around the world. Part-time climate defender, part-time flight captain of kerosene fliers: He used to say that his profession should not prevent him from doing something for the climate. Now Lüscher, at 53, has given up the pilot's job. He wants to devote himself entirely to climate protection. "Time is pressing," he explains the step. If Earth were a plane, it would have to stay on the ground, he says. Too dangerous. "Red and orange warning lights are flashing everywhere in the cockpit." In the next ten years, climate protection is to be the top priority in his life. After that, he plans his pension. "And if we haven't stopped climate change until then, it's too late," he is convinced. He thinks of irreversible tilting effects such as thawing permafrost soils that trigger uncontrolled processes in the ecosystem. One of the current Myblueplanet projects is the Climate Actions app, which is designed to playfully animate the climate-friendly lifestyle. In the coming weeks, Myblueplanet will apply to the Bündner Klimarally with various actions. Among the embassies is Alt-Bundesratin Doris Leuthard. Myblueplanet is also present in schools nationwide, for example with the project "Every cell counts", in which classes with crowdfunding campaigns bring solar systems to the Schuldach. When ex-pilot Lüscher talks about these projects and campaigns, he shines. He raves about the helpers, from the risk manager to the kindergarten teacher to the retired advertiser. Myblueplanet is as positive as its founder. The message: We save the world! Why the UBS is allowed to be there But what does the small-sized child do in a personal lifestyle when the important decisions in large numbers meet others? Unlike the climate youth, who demands decisive action from politics, Myblueplanet is in vain looking for political positions. "Politics must do its job, and we do ours," says Lüscher. There were enough people and organisations to be involved in politics. "We build solar plants on roofs and plant trees with the Pathi – that's what no one else does." The list of Myblueplanet's partners shows the difference between the climate youth and the climate youth. In addition to public offices such as the Federal Office for the Environment, Lottery Funds and Foundations, the private sector is also represented, for example with the large banks UBS and CS, to which climate activists blame a co-inflict on climate change. Lüscher says that he perceives a change of thinking at the financial centre, albeit not everywhere. "The big players will need to create the transition from the old to the new world, for example in the form of loans for renewable technologies." A persuasive person Personally, Lüscher first considers it indispensable that the CO2 Act was adopted on 13 May. It was adopted on 1 June. And flying must be more expensive, of course. He was glad that the world community had committed itself to the net zero target. The EU is doing a good job, Lüscher says, Joe Biden in the USA too. "And we in Switzerland are just as often not the fastest." He does not regret the fact that he himself took a long time to finish his pilot career. "That was just my way I had to do. I like our planet so much because I have met him so intensively as a pilot."After years of long-haul flights and business flying he worked as a cargo pilot. His last flight was from Leipzig to Rome at the end of 2020, and aboard was Covid's protective material. Lüscher invests the newly gained time in a Master's degree in Sustainable Business at the Business School in Lausanne. He wants to develop sustainable ideas with companies in the future and further develop the Climate Actions project for companies. This should also bring money, because the income from the small part of the population he has on Myblueplanet today will not be enough for a long time. Lüscher is a persuasive man. "Everything I've changed in my lifestyle has turned out to be a gain for me." Travelling on the train is more exciting than travelling on a plane or in a car. The climate-conscious diet is good for his health. And the car-free garage is now a kind of meeting place. During the Football-EM, the free entrance becomes a public viewing for friends and neighbors. Daniel Lüscher is the founder of the environmental protection organization Myblueplanet.