New cars in Switzerland: Despite CO? lows – car dealers must pay record buses The emissions of pollutants fell to a historic low in 2020. And yet importers must pay fines. How does that fit together? Stefan Häne Less sold new cars, lower carbon dioxide values: the car industry is feeling the pandemic. Corona hit the car market massively. 237,000 new cars arrived on the roads of Switzerland and Liechtenstein last year, as few as since the oil crisis in the 1970s. The pandemic year has also brought a striking twist in statistics in another area: the average CO? output of new cars has fallen by more than 10 percent compared to the previous year, from 138 grams per kilometer to just under 124; the Federal Office of Energy (SFOE) confirms research in this newspaper. Although the definitive value is not yet fixed, changes behind the comma are still possible. Either way, the decline brings two records. On the one hand, the CO? emissions of new cars have never fallen as much as in 2020; the largest reduction so far was achieved in 2014 to 2015 with a minus of 5 percent. On the other hand, the average CO? emission of new cars has never been as low as last year. The main reason for the improved CO? balance are the booming cars with alternative engines. Last year there were almost 67,000 vehicles, almost two thirds more than in 2019. Stronger target shows effect Despite everything: importers must pay fines again now – and this in record level. According to information from this newspaper, it's between 100 and 200 million francs. The SFOE confirms this order of magnitude, but detailed figures are not known until summer. In any case, this is significantly more than in the previous top year 2019 with 78 million Swiss francs. At the same time, however, it is clearly less than the industry feared before the introduction of the sharper climate targets; it was talking about medium to high three-digit million amounts. Part of this discrepancy is due to the fact that the decline in new car sales in the Corona year has reduced the overall sanction volume. Auto-Switzerland, the association of Swiss auto importers, does not want to comment on the new figures before their official publication. The combination of record-low CO? values and record-high sanctions seems contradictory. But there is a simple explanation for this: Since last year, a more stringent CO? target value of 95 grams per kilometre and vehicle has been applied; so far, it has been 130 grams. In addition, for the first time in 2020, vans and light semitrailers also had to meet CO2 targets. The industry must continue to expect penalties to be paid. ==References====External links== The CO? law will be approved by the EU on June 30, and the carbon dioxide target will be gradually lowered. The pressure to bring low-emission or zero-emission models onto the market and sell them would therefore increase. The Swiss Transport Club (VCS) expects that further tightening will have an effect accordingly. Even below the old target of 130 grams, emissions rose slightly between 2017 and 2019. "The importers can obviously adapt to more climate-friendly requirements," says Stéphanie Penher, Head of Transport Policy at the VCS. Hybrids more popular than e-cars It is interesting to note that last year's growth in alternative engines is only about a third of those vehicles that do not have any CO in operation? The statistics count 19-500 purely electric new cars. Most popular were hybrid cars without charging capacity (22,000), which have increased the percentage of plug-in hybrids (14的500). These cars, like the normal hybrid cars, have a combustion and an electric motor, but offer higher electrical power and drive with a significantly larger battery, which can be charged at charging stations. However, plug-in hybrids are critical as they often consume more fossil fuel in practice than stated by manufacturers. The problem is now recognized. With a new test procedure, the carbon dioxide values will become more realistic in the future. If the gap between paper value and real consumption widens, the Federal Council can take measures in the future, such as correcting emissions for the relevant importer. However, the voter must approve the new CO? law. In the current year, nothing has changed in the picture so far: hybrids have been able to increase their market share in new cars by almost 7 percentage points to 21 percent. The plug-in hybrids have also increased: from 6 to 8 percent. On the other hand, the purely electric new cars show only a marginal increase and are at 8.5 percent. Industry experts explain this, among other things, by the fact that the majority of tenants still cannot load their vehicle at home. The new CO2 law, which promotes the expansion of charging stations, also promises improvement, especially in multi-party houses. Auto-Switzerland does not want to see the trend outlined as a negative climate policy. In the course of the year, only a few new purely electric models have come onto the market, unlike the hybrids, says spokesman Christoph Wolnik. He expects this to be balanced throughout the year. Hybridization and thus partial electrification would become more and more standard to make the drives more efficient, says Wolnik. «Reinen Verkommunternen are on the retreat.»