Subaru vs. CO? law: Automark sends sponsoring cancellation – with explosive justification Cultural organisers are now also involved in the fight for CO? rules: Subaru answers to a request with political side blows. Fabian Renz The Lucerne FDP stand Damian Müller becomes the target of the automotive industry. Climate and exhaust gases are currently being heavily fought for politically. ==References== The people vote on the new CO? law on June, and only in March did Parliament make a decision which is difficult to follow for luxury car producers: In future, the models of small and niche brands will no longer be preferred in the CO? target values, but will be treated in the same way as all other cars. As is now shown, the debate also spreads into the non-political cultural sphere. This was recently experienced by the organizers of a cultural event in Central Switzerland. They asked the car manufacturer Subaru for sponsorship and received a rejection – with explicit reference to the political development that was detrimental to the industry. And with a frantic personal side blow: In the rejection, it is expressly pointed out that Damian Müller is sitting on the patronage committee of the occasion of the Lucerne FDP stand. It is this one that is ecstatic by its climate policy commitment in the industry: it was he who launched the push for equal treatment for all new cars, and he actively advocates a yes to the CO2 law in the summer. "We no longer commission expensive television advertising for such fiscal burdens." Müller's new-car motion will lead to massively higher CO2 "criminal taxes," says the Subaru response to the organizers of this newspaper. "You will understand that we (and the majority of the industry) can no longer commission expensive television advertising or enter into sponsorship engagements with such fiscal burdens." The "beautiful amounts" that have been used until recently for advertising and sponsorship "we are now delivering in Berne." The organizers are also advised to reject the CO2 law in the summer. "Mr and Mrs Schweizer" would have to think carefully about how they wanted to vote and vote in the future. FDP stand-up is outraged Councilman Müller is outraged by the Subaru reaction: it is a "highly problematic action". It is worrying that circles so fond of talking about sovereignty reacted so unsovereignly. «Not the rejection of sponsorship itself is disturbing. Rather, it is stussing that a democratically correct, clear parliamentary decision is abused as a justification here," Müller is annoyed. According to him, Subaru tries to influence the vote on the CO2 Act "under threat of financial sanctions". Müller sees his successful motion for uniform rules on emissions taxes – which, he stresses, has not yet been implemented – as a "liberal concern". It had nothing to do with the CO2 Act and the impact on Subaru was not yet quantifiable. «It is also true that as soon as the motion submitted becomes effective, the Subaru brand will be severely affected.» Emil Frey Group, Swiss general importer of Subaru brand, defends the sponsorship cancellation on request. It goes without saying that the sponsoring budgets "would be narrower in the current, Corona-related, particularly difficult situation." The selection of possible sponsorship activities is therefore more limited. "The fact is that once the motion submitted becomes effective, the Subaru brand will be severely affected," the company informs. It will take more than a month to complete the urn. The noise around the Subaru sponsorship shows that the hot phase in the voting campaign for the CO2 law has probably just begun.