Interview with Simonetta Sommaruga : «If we reject the law, the oil industry has won» The Environment Minister also sees the Climate Act as an economic stimulus and calls on the climate youth not to play into the hands of the opponent Denis von Burg, Adrian Schmid Simonetta Sommaruga fights on all fronts for the CO? law. With the vote on the CO2 levy, climate policy is once again coming to the fore. Minister for the Environment and Energy Simonetta Sommaruga is required. For them, the template is the A and O of climate policy, and it quickly gets between all fronts. For the SVP and parts of the economy the law goes far too far, for the climate youth it is far too tame. We confront the Federal Council with the best arguments from both camps. Germany is now aiming to become climate neutral by 2045, while Switzerland is not planning to become climate neutral until 2050, according to the Federal Council's objective. Are we already being abandoned? I hope not. But it is all the more clear that the CO2 law is absolutely necessary for the climate and location of Switzerland. The law will halve CO2 emissions by 2030. Further steps are needed after 2030 for the "Net Zero" target. We must now move forward, including for our economy. Otherwise, we will stand there in 2030 and rub our eyes because we have been technologically and economically abandoned. Why? The other countries have understood that the future belongs to climate-friendly technologies. Europe is therefore moving forward, and the US is back in the field of climate protection. The competition that is leading and exportable in the field of technology is fully launched. The US also wants jobs and value added in its country. We must have this claim too! Switzerland is well positioned today. With the CO2 law and the investments it entails, we lay the foundation for maintaining technology competition and getting away from oil and natural gas. For the climate youth, the CO2 law is completely inadequate. I understand that the law goes too little far for some. But if we reject the law, the oil industry won, not the climate youth. The oil companies want us to continue to pay 8 billion foreign oil and gas producers every year, instead of building up clean energy production at home and applying climate-friendly technologies. "The US also wants jobs and value added in its country. We too must have this claim!» The question is whether this will succeed? The technologies are there, they are profitable. We need to use it now. With the law, we create the conditions for this. But it's going to be expensive for many in this country. How much? First of all, if we don't do anything, it will be very, very expensive for our children and grandchildren. The law promotes access to new cheap technologies, helps save energy and rewards those who consume little oil. Many households save money with the law and end up having more money in the wallet than they do today. The SVP says: A family of four will have to pay 1000 francs more in the year. Look: Behind the referendum is the oil industry, which wants to save its business model and therefore now peddles with such figures. That's not credible. Why not, you can recalculate it. Because the opponents operate with extreme examples. How many families do you know, who fly with their children three times a year on vacation, live in a huge villa and want to hold on to their oil heating? Such a budget may pay a thousand francs more. That's not representative. "Behind the referendum is the oil industry, which wants to save its business model and therefore now has such figures. This is not credible." What is representative? When you look at how most families actually live. On this basis, the experts of the Federation have counted. A family with two children, an average living space, an average petrol car and a European flight per year will pay 100 francs more at the end of the 2020s. It is also important: if the family heats with wood or with a heat pump or does not fly every year, it has more money in the wallet thanks to the redistribution. He who lives in the countryside is the one who is bruised. The law strikes a ditch between the city and the country. This is demonstrably wrong. Otherwise, the farmers' association and the working group for mountain areas would not be in favour of the law. The rural and mountainous regions in particular are already feeling the costly consequences of climate change. If nothing happens, agriculture will increasingly be faced with problems, cable cars are at risk, the forest of protection must be reforested, and tourism is under even more pressure. This is going to be very expensive. That may be. But people often need one or two cars and rely on oil heating because there is no district heating connection like in the city. Four out of ten households are already heating without oil and gas and therefore do not pay any CO2 levy, zero francs. In various rural cantons, it is even more than half of households that do not pay CO2 dues, for example in Graubünden or Valais. Many heat with a heat pump or wood and save so much money. You want to go on vacation. This will continue to be possible in the future. With the ticket tax and the expected refunds, only 10 percent of the population will have to pay on it, namely frequent flyers. They don't live in the countryside and in the mountain areas......and you have to go to work by car. You can keep doing that. Thanks to the CO2 Act, more efficient vehicles are introduced to the market that consume less petrol. That's how you save money. Whether the price of petrol will rise will not be decided by the Federal Council, but by the oil industry. However, Parliament has set an extra ceiling for the protection of motorists. Because we know that many depend on the car. The oil lobby, which decides on a price increase, is fear-making with the petrol price. Parts of the CO2 dues are refunded, but nobody sees it because it is a small number on the health insurance bill. That's right. Here we missed to show people clearly what they're getting back. Everyone – from the toddler to the grandfather – receives the same amount. This is very social and important for families and the middle class. Today every person receives 87 francs, with the new law it is considerably more, namely 167 francs. I want this climate bonus to become more visible. With a family of four, that's a lot of money, 668 francs a year. "Ideal if the population were to receive the money directly. Then a family would have the 668 francs in hand in the future. Or everyone will receive a check." What exactly should be changed? It would be ideal if the population were to receive the money directly. Then a family would have the 668 francs in hand in the future. Or everyone gets a check. But we'd have to turn the whole system around for that. In the short term, I would like to begin by improving information. Each person should see at a glance how high this climate bonus is every year. And I want to make sure that the information works electronically. What is not refunded from the CO2 levy goes into the climate fund. Who guarantees that this will support truly climate-friendly projects? The law is clear. For example, the money supports homeowners who replace their oil heating, promotes the construction of charging stations for electric cars or supports communities in the construction of district heating networks. ==References== promoting the development of green kerosene in aviation. But is all this worth the high price at all? Switzerland has already saved a lot of CO2 and only emits a negligible part of world consumption. The age of oil and coal is coming to an end. These energy sources no longer have a future. The question has long ceased to be whether we want to continue with climate-damaging energy consumption or rely on climate-friendly technologies. What? We must ask ourselves how we as a country benefit economically from this change, which is unstoppable. In Switzerland, there are countless companies that want to bring environmental technologies to the market and thereby gain a competitive advantage. If we do not go ahead, we will continue to pay our money to the foreign oil industry, and business with the new technologies will be done by other countries. "If we do not go ahead, we will continue to pay our money to the foreign oil industry, and the business with the new technologies will be done by other countries." The counter-committee says that with a switch to a kind of hydrogen economy and the exploitation of CO2, the climate problem could be solved without the CO2 dues. The same circles have said no to everything – the current CO2 law, the new CO2 law and the energy strategy. Now they are bringing expensive and inadequate proposals. That's not credible. I do not see how this plan, if it were to work technologically at all, could be implemented without huge sums of funding. In addition, hydrogen technology can also be promoted with the CO2 law. What do you personally do for the climate? I use public transport very often. Last year as President of the Federal Republic of Germany, I went to Vienna on the night train to visit the state. I was also travelling by train for a work visit to Rome. I also have a Tesla as a service car. I'm sure you can do more. I think I'm like most people in our country. We do a lot of things, but we can do even more without giving up anything. For example, I have solar panels on the roof, producing my own electricity. Now I would like to connect the house to the district heating network. "My mini is only three years old now. But I can assure you that if I ever need a new car, it will certainly be an electric one." Will you also sort out your mini you drive privately? My mini is only three years old now. But I can assure you, if I ever need a new car, it'll certainly be an electric one. Also car fans who have switched privately to electric vehicles say they never want to go back. The CO2 law is relatively defensive in terms of the load on petrol and diesel. Is that enough to herald the end of the combustion engines? The fact that the oil industry still depends on the petrol is understandable from their point of view. But the development is towards electric cars. The long-standing president of the TCS section in Zurich recently said that the gasoline car was a run-out model. And the industry tells me that in 2030, there will hardly be any pure petrol cars on the market, perhaps earlier. The TCS supports the CO2 law, precisely because it is committed to car drivers. But do we then have enough electricity, especially green electricity from the inland? I have long believed that we need to massively expand the production of electricity from renewable energies in Switzerland in order to strengthen security of supply. Before the summer, therefore, I am bringing a proposal to Parliament which is precisely the purpose. It also provides for measures to strengthen security of supply in winter. Do we need an additional electricity agreement with the EU to guarantee security of supply? It does not look as if we can quickly conclude such an agreement. Should the Federal Council therefore sign the framework agreement so that we can better integrate into the European market with a power contract? The question of the framework agreement is currently being discussed in the Federal Council. Different elements play a role. Of course, we need to weigh opportunities and risks. The question of the electricity agreement is an important element. But not only the electricity agreement is crucial for security of supply. Why not? In any case, we must produce more clean electricity in Switzerland and not simply rely on imports – even in a possible electricity agreement with the EU. However, Swiss electricity producers, which are a large part of the public sector, are investing heavily in renewable energy abroad. That is indeed the case. We have to change that. In order to ensure security of supply, companies and their owners, in many cases the cantons, are responsible. You're in charge of production. And does it still need gas power plants? The focus is clearly on the expansion of renewable energies. Hydropower reliably supplies electricity even in winter. Should a supply gap still be emerging, gas power plants could become an issue. But they would have to be climate neutral, and that would be expensive. Fossil energies are expensive. That is why I expect energy producers to really rely on renewable energy from domestic sources. Is that realistic? If we only install solar panels on all suitable roofs in Switzerland, we can produce twice as much electricity as all nuclear power plants together. To exploit this potential is in the foreground for me. I don't think we should just take more money out of the federal fund. The CO2 law is already our climate programme, with which we can strengthen Switzerland at the same time. SP and Greens are calling for a state environmental investment programme to boost the economy after the pandemic. In the USA, Joe Biden even plans a climate-corona program for Switzerland? I don't think we should just take more money out of the federal fund. Rather, we need the right framework conditions. The economy wants to move forward on its own initiative, but needs collateral. We can deliver these with the CO2 Act. In addition, the Climate Fund provides the necessary funds to finance climate action. Does this mean that the federal government lacks the money anyway due to the Corona crisis in order to invest heavily in climate protection? No, the money's not the problem. The CO2 law is already our climate programme, with which we can strengthen Switzerland at the same time. The law provides for contracts for our SMEs. This is how we secure jobs in Switzerland.