United for the climate and yet not all of the Zurich climate movement Cyrill Hermann and Annika Lutzke have co-organized the "Strike for Future". But they do not agree with the vote on the CO2 Act. Tim Wirth He's only 17 years old, but she only has the German passport. Although Annika Lutzke and Cyrill Hermann are not allowed to vote, they have made many thoughts about the CO2 law. She'd vote no, he would. It sees no solution to the climate crisis in Swiss democracy, it is more likely. Annika Lutzke and Cyrill Hermann are symbolic of the breadth of the climate movement. The Strike for Future also includes trade unions, parishes, neighbourhood associations and NGOs. «Do you not want to have to imagine having to explain to your future grandchild what snow is?» – that is what the organizers ask in the announcement. On the evening before the "Strike for Future", Annika Lutzke and Cyrill Hermann stand at a wooden counter and spoonful of soy quark. "Who has the disinfectant?", "Who drives banners for a demonstration to Helvetia Square?" These are questions that they now, after months of preparation, still have to clarify. In between Annika Lutzke quickly sells two packets of dried pineapple. The counter at which she stands is not only the meeting point to discuss strike details, but also the cash register of the «rampe 21», the food cooperative in which she works. "So I'm getting involved," she says. Instead of regulating Migros and Coop through the parliamentary path, she prefers to invent her own shop. The suppliers are fair there and the vegetables are not sprayed with pesticides. In recent months, the 18-year-old has been in Bosnia and has distributed food and clothing to refugees. At the same time, she co-organized the Strike for Future via Zoom. "The political system is not able to solve our problems," she says. "That was incredible" The Zurich woman was politicized in the cantonal school, which she has now completed. At the first climate strikes two years ago, she noticed that she could change something. "That was incredible," says Lutzke. ==References====External links== She would refuse to vote on June 5. Because it's antisocial, because it takes banks and large corporations out of their responsibilities. And because it's a joke in the fight against climate change. The climate strike movement has not been able to decide a position at national level, nor has it been able to vote. Only the SVP and the EDU say no to the law, which among other things wants to increase the cost of flying and increase the CO2 levy on fuel oil and natural gas. The CO2 law does not euphorize Cyrill Hermann either. "If even the FDP is in favour of it, it cannot be a real climate protection," he says. The tons of CO2 that the law does not emit would not save the world. It was suggested that something really changed. The 17-year-old speaks of "Greenwashing". Climate protection will be passed on to individuals and the financial centre will be spared. Nevertheless, Cyrill Hermann has voted in favour of a yes in the climate strike movement. His Gotti works in the construction sector. In order to save energy in the buildings, the law actually brings something. A yes would also be a sign that Switzerland wants more climate protection. "It is important that we broaden our base," says Hermann. Politics is a lever for him. «And we don't have time, so we have to kill this one as well.» During the climate strike, the gymnasium became more active during the first lockdown. When the federal government spoke money for the airline industry, he became angry and felt helpless, Hermann told the online magazine "Tsüri.ch". Because of the pandemic, he had a lot of time to inform himself about the climate crisis. His activism now takes so much time that he notices it in the school grades. "We are ready" A second generation of climate strikes have formed, says Hermann, "even if that sounds a bit RAF-like now." The knowledge is passed on. It was very clear how well the movement was set up. A wiki with knowledge about the climate crisis and the movement, chats on telegram with subgroups, international networking – all of this has become stronger during the pandemic. "We are ready for the next wave of protests," says Hermann. The "Strike for Future" is only the beginning of mobilization. He taps messages on the keyboard of his laptop with his fingers, some of which are colored with red nail polish. It is still unclear where the disinfectant is located. Meanwhile, Annika Lutzke answers media requests and drinks Mate. "Fossil Capital", a book about the roots of climate change, is next to the cash register. She learned to know Cyrill Hermann about the climate movement. "For both of us, fighting for the climate is a big part of life," she says. Engaging for a future worth living – that's what connects. The difference between them is the "Theory of Change", the plan of what the change should look like exactly. Outside the food cooperative Lutzke tells her vision in the evening sun. She is interested in the socialist side. That a banker earns as much as a person in care. Away from economic growth, towards collective structures. Many strikers are no longer concerned with the climate, but also with anti-racism, feminism and anti-capitalism, including the Strike for Future. This has also brought criticism to the movement. It was no longer clear what she was really working for. Cyrill Hermann says: "I am less of anarcho than Annika." When he received his first tax bill this year, he also wondered why he should pay money to a state that would ruin his future. The people behind the Strike for Future are very diverse. Their opinions would split not only in the CO2 law, but also in the nature of activism. "Not all support illegal actions," says Hermann. But the climate movement can also withstand such discussions.