SP Delegates' Meeting: Wermuth: Framework agreements in this form unacceptable SP Co President Cédric Wermuth has spoken out for a united Europe – and against a framework agreement in its current form. In addition, the party has made its remaining slogans for the next votes. SDA Cédric Wermuth speaks digitally to the delegates in Bern. SP Co President Cédric Wermuth has given a clear rejection of the Framework Agreement (InstA) Switzerland-EU in its current form. From the point of view of the social democrats, wage protection in the treaty is inadequate. However, according to Wermuth, the SP remains Europe-friendly. The framework agreement freed up wage protection at the conclusion and risked weakening the service public. And this is not about "peanuts," said Wermuth. The Aargauer Wermuth shot directly at the Federal Council: "Perhaps the InstA could have been a chance, but then the free-minded Hors-Sol diplomacy and its Federal Councils really screwed it up, as they say where I come from." At the last moment of the negotiations, these "at the command of their clients tried to bury the prospect of joining the EU forever and at the same time to eliminate the unloved wage protection measures". «The core of social democracy» It is precisely the protection of wages and trade from social dumping that is not simply an aspect of Swiss European policy among many, but its absolute foundation. «It is not about tactics or party positioning. It's about the core of what it is to be a social democrat." The crucial question for the left is a simple one, says Wermuth. "Would Europe be a better Europe without the Union? The answer: no. It is precisely because of the fact that the tasks of our time have been objectively beyond the borders of the nation-state."The SP wants Switzerland to come down from the European political siding and take a course for more integration in Europe. According to Wermuth, Switzerland should be present in Europe According to the Social Democrats, Switzerland wants to participate in the European Green New Deal and in the European investment programmes according to Covid. And they wanted to work together on taxes, on regulation of the financial centre, on building a European health system, on education, on culture, on developing occupational safety and health. Within the SP, it is a matter of dealing with the EU. A group had warned at the end of April in a letter to the SP Bureau of the failure of the framework agreement. If Switzerland goes off to the European political side, that is fatal. Various government councils, including Beat Jans, President of Basel and former SP Federal Councillor Moritz Leuenberger, have signed the contract. Berset warns of poverty traps Federal Councillor Alain Berset warned the SP delegates about a growing gap between the poor and the rich via a video circuit. Never before has there been so much talk of solidarity as during the Corona pandemic, but that puts the eye on other problems. "Many of the problems that were already big before this crisis are even bigger," said the SP Health Minister. "The next few years will be difficult – and most difficult for the weaker. Also in our country." Berset pleaded for more equality and justice. The next «test for our society» will come after Switzerland has defeated the pandemic. Not only employees, but also many companies are dependent on society not simply dropping them. All of them would need solidarity if they were in distress, Berset said, pleading for the adoption of the Covid 19 law in the referendum on 13 May. ==References== "We can fight the pandemic without this law. That's what we have the epidemics law for. But in order to combat the economic crisis and to continue the financial assistance as long as necessary, we need this Covid-19 law to do so," said the Minister of Health. Three Yes Paroles and One Time No On Saturday, the SP also held its remaining slogans for the Swiss votes of 13 July. ==References== September: Yes to the Covid-19 Act, the 99 percent initiative and marriage for all, No to the Anti-Terror Act. The party had already spent three times in February on the People's Initiative for Clean Drinking Water and Healthy Food, as well as the People's Initiative "For a Switzerland without synthetic pesticides" and the CO2 Act. The SP delegates also passed several resolutions on Saturday: "Together for a climate-friendly future", "Quickly and in solidarity from the pandemic: for a worldwide fair access to Corona vaccines", "For a sustainable financial centre" and "Against the genocide against the Uighurs".