What if the CO2 law fails? Vote on the climate proposal A no at the poll would reject Switzerland in climate protection according to the Federal Office for the Environment. We show what the most important consequences would be. Stefan Häne and Martin Läubli The fight for the CO2 law remains close, as the third opinion poll of "20 minutes" and Tamedia shows. In the voting campaign, the main focus has been on the financial consequences of the proposal. The consequences of a rejection of the law, which sets climate policy by 2030, were less discussed. The Federal Office for the Environment expects that Switzerland could not reduce its domestic emissions by at least 37.5 percent as planned compared to 1990 but only by 23 percent. The models of the Energy Perspectives 2050+ of the Federal Office of Energy (SFOE) have a similar value. That would be only 9 percentage points more than achieved by 2019. The reason is that if there is a no, there are no planned instruments and that existing ones are not further tightened. — Petrol price Today, fuel importers must compensate for CO2 emissions from petrol and diesel with climate protection measures. For this, they can cost the fuel by a maximum of 5 centimetres per litre; in reality, it is 1.5. The new law raises this ceiling to 12 raps. In the event of a no, not only would this surcharge be applicable, but the fuel importers would be completely exempt from the CO2 compensation obligation in the future, because the legal basis for continuation is missing. The increase in CO2 emissions in transport has so far had no effect, since they have remained at a high level since 1990. — New cars Today, new cars are allowed to emit an average of 95 grams of CO2 per kilometre. The new CO2 Act would gradually tighten this target. If no was found, the target value would remain frozen. This would reduce the incentive for car importers to bring more efficient vehicles to the market. However, the share of electric vehicles in traffic must rise very quickly by 2030 according to the energy perspectives 2050+, so that climate neutrality is achieved by 2050. The cycle of renewal sets the pace. Less than 10 percent of the entire vehicle fleet is renewed every year. According to the study, in 2030, 60 percent of the new car fleet should drive electrically and partially electrically to reach the path to climate neutrality. — Air ticket tax The federal government expects revenues of around CHF 1 billion per year. A little more than half of this will be refunded to the population and companies, the rest will flow into climate protection measures. Airlines can also reduce the air ticket tax by 20 percent if they use climate-friendly fuels. In the case of a no, there would still be no financial incentive to fly less and to rely more on alternative fuels. Until now, there is no tax on kerosene. In addition, three-digit million-dollar funding was lost, for example for the expansion of the charging infrastructure for electric cars or the promotion of climate-friendly innovations. — Heating If no were to be applied, the maximum possible surcharge for fossil fuels would remain at 120 francs per tonne, 90 francs less than planned under the new law. Today, the surcharge is 96 francs, so the room for manoeuvre would be much smaller – and thus the pressure to accelerate the switch to renewable energy via higher fossil energy prices. — Companies Today, some of the companies – in total, around 1100 – can be exempted from the CO2 levy, provided that they commit to reduce their CO2 emissions in return. Companies in the metal, machinery and chemical industries, for example, benefit from this. As this rule is limited in the CO2 Act, which is still in force until the end of 2021, these companies would have to pay the CO2 levy in the future – which would result in "significant additional costs" for them, according to the Federal Office for the Environment. Not in force in the case of a no, nor in the new regulation that all companies can be exempted from the levy if they reduce their CO2 emissions. According to the Energy Agency of the economy, since 2013, around 4000 companies with a target agreement have reduced more than half a million tons of CO2. The economic association writes: "It is important, in particular, from an economic point of view, that the revision of the CO2 law gives all companies access to the proven system of target agreements." — Buildings In the case of a no, homeowners could easily replace an old oil or gas heating system with a fossil plant that was under pressure to re-sat a renewable alternative. By contrast, the new CO2 Act would make this much more difficult in a first phase and would in fact make it impossible in the 2030s. The buildings have so far been affected by modernisation. Windows, for example, are only improved energetically at an annual rate of 3 percent according to energy perspectives 2050+, while the modernization rate for exterior walls and floors is even below 1 percent. The reason is the high investment costs and the long payback periods. The Climate Fund of the CO2 Act can provide financial support. — Possible light version? However, it is not certain whether the reduction by 2030 in the event of a no to the CO2 law actually only betrays 23 percent, as the Federal Office for the Environment estimates. It is conceivable that Parliament would extend or update the current CO2 law after a no instruments from the current one until the end of 2021. "We could quickly obtain such a template in the current law, which we have already done recently," says FDP National Councillor Christian Wasserfallen. He himself thinks about the target agreements, which companies could still conclude after a no. "Of course, one would have to see if at least a light version would be possible," says National Councillor Bastien Girod. But this, according to the Greens, would be too late one way or another. — Budget: 150 tonnes per capita The rush is often overtaxed by opponents of the bill. The reason: Switzerland's share of global emissions is only about one percent. Although the impact on the global climate is limited, our country has ratified the Paris Climate Agreement – and therefore all the States parties must make their contribution. But what does that mean? Today, climate researchers are able to create a budget for how much CO2 can still be emitted globally to achieve the Paris climate targets. This can also be calculated down to Switzerland. One method is to distribute the emission budget on the basis of population. Every citizen of the earth would have a CO2 balance of 150 tons today to prevent a 2-degree warming, for the 1.5-degree target it is only about 50 tons. For Switzerland, this would have a budget of around 1.3 billion and 460 million tonnes of CO2. Reto Schleiniger from the Centre for Energy and Environment at ZHAW-Winterthur has calculated how large the emissions of Switzerland will still be until Switzerland achieves climate neutrality in 2050, as the Federal Council is aiming for. The reduction of emissions starts with the 2018 reference year. The cumulative emission volume is 715 million tonnes. Even if these are ultimately numerical games, they nevertheless illustrate: the budget for the 1.5 degree target is clearly exceeded, the climate policy efforts of Switzerland are in principle too short with CO2 law. In contrast to the 2-degree target, Switzerland would be on course here. Final energy consumption in Switzerland by sector Greenhouse gas emissions The proposal aims to gradually increase the CO2 limit values of new cars: Autobahn A6. Photo: Christian Pfander There would still be no incentive to fly less and to rely on alternative fuels.