It remains close to the fight for the CO2 law Tamedia survey A narrow majority is the good name of the proposal. Proponents have been able to slow down the negative trend of recent weeks. ==References== June is still open. Stefan Häne Simonetta Sommaruga can breathe, at least a little. For the CO2 Act, which she is responsible for as Minister of the Environment, it looks a little better a week and a half before the poll. This is indicated by the recent opinion poll of "20 minutes" and Tamedia. In the third wave of the survey, the vote share for the submission is 53 percent. This is slightly below the result of the first wave of surveys (54 percent), but above that of the second (50 percent). The approval does not seem to crumble further, but rather to grow on the contrary. The forthcoming vote reveals a marked fault between urban and rural Switzerland. While the law finds a rich majority in the cities (65 percent), it clearly fails in the country (44 percent). In the agglomerations, the submission reaches just about the approval value with 54 percent as in the entire voting population. Little surprising is the resistance to the template in the SVP the greatest. 86 percent reject the law. A majority of the FDP base also continues to say no, unlike its party. However, in the FDP, the proponents' camp has increased by 5 percentage points and now comes to 41 percent. According to the second wave of surveys, free-minded people had declared that the benefits of the law had to be explained even better on their own basis. The increase in the Ja camp could be an indication that this has been achieved. Young people say more yes No movement is to be seen in the middle party. According to the survey, the base continues to crack quite exactly in the middle: 49 percent say no, 50 yes (1 percent abstained). Why does the party not succeed in convincing its own people more strongly? President Gerhard Pfister does not seem to trust the poll: all cantonal parties have decided to vote the yes-parole, he says. In addition, the new JRC survey showed that the base was approved by 63 percent. For sure, the opponents cannot win the vote with the SVP and FDP voters alone. They need more votes. The camp of climate activists offers potential: part of the climate strike movement rejects the law because it does not go far enough. As the third survey shows, however, the negative share of Greens, GLP and SP has declined further. The Greens have the greatest support (93 percent), followed by GLP (84 percent) and SP (82 percent). The CO2 law has also gained support among the boys. In the meantime, 50 percent of 18-34-year-olds say yes; in the second wave of the survey, it was only 45 percent. It may have played a role that those sections of the climate strike movement that approve the law have recently made themselves more publicly felt. The findings outlined are to be used with caution insofar as the error range of the survey is plus/minus 1.2 percentage points. Political scientist Fabio Wasserfallen sums up: "The vote is still open." Depending on which side is better mobilized, there could be a tremor – contrary to expectations, as one admits in the camp of supporters. "The agricultural initiatives have long been the focus," says Green National Councillor Regula Rytz. "The CO2 law seemed harmless and undisputed except for the oil lobby." The advocates, Rytz says, would therefore give everything in the "final sprint". The opponents will do this, of course. The survey is to be enjoyed with caution, says SVP National Councillor Christian Imark. "Our activities and feedback show that the no-trend in the population is increasing." SP-Magistratin Sommaruga will probably have to shake until the last. Is Switzerland actually heading towards more climate protection? Voting poster in Zurich. Photo: Laura Zimmermann (Keystone) Close race in the CO2 Act, agricultural initiatives lose total 17-193 weighted responses from the Tamedia survey on the polls of the 13th century. ==References====External links==* Official website Welle So it is about the other templates Significant minus for the drinking water initiative 41 percent of the voting population want on the 13th. On the other hand, the number of women in the survey was 7 percentage points lower than in the second wave of the survey. 57 percent reject the idea. The wind has turned: In the first wave of surveys, the initiative was supported by 54 percent. The party political polarization remains unchanged: Left and Green Liberals clearly say yes, all others say no. The city-country conflict is also marked. If 53 percent of the bill is well received in the cities, it is markedly less in the agglomerations (41 percent) and especially in the countryside (33 percent). Pesticide ban loses support Again, the arrow shows downwards from the point of view of the supporters. Meanwhile, 42 percent of the concern is still well received, here too, the minus is 7 percentage points compared to the second survey. 57 percent are now against the initiative. In comparison, the first survey was still dominated by a small majority. The conflict lines are practically the same as in the drinking water initiative, both party-politically and geographically. Women also agree with this proposal a little more often than men and over 65 years of age slightly clearer than 18-34-year-olds. However, a majority does not find the initiative in any of these groups. Clear fronts in the Covid-19 Act The approval remains high at 69 percent. 29 percent reject the law. The fronts are clearly defined: while the presentation is not being gouted by the voters of the SVP, it finds rich majorities in all other parties. The highest rate of support for the SP and GLP base is 87 percent each. Cityrs also agree with the law more than the inhabitants in the agglomerations and in the countryside. For age groups, the law provides the largest support for those aged 65 and over with 79 percent, the least for those aged 18 to 34 (63 percent). Support for the Terrorism Act is falling Supporters are in the front line, but their lead has shrunk. 63 percent say yes – 4 percentage points less than in the second survey. Meanwhile, the opponents were able to increase by 7 percentage points and now stand at 34 percent. The largest is the support of the FDP and the centre, where 81 percent each approve of the proposal. Support in SVP and GLP is lower at 67 percent each. The majority opposed the proposal is the support of SP and Greens. However, the no-majorities of 52 percent and 56 percent are not particularly clear in the two left-wing parties.