Opinions Bitter reality Even with the new CO2 law, it becomes difficult for Switzerland to achieve the intensified climate target. Stefan Häne Greenhouse gas emissions are falling in Switzerland – as in previous years. In 2019 it was still 46.2 million tonnes, 0.3 million less than in the previous year. None of the most important sectors – buildings, industry and transport – have experienced a decline. Only in agriculture and in the case of synthetic greenhouse gases the arrow showed slightly downwards. This is evidenced by new figures published by the federal government on Monday. Thus, emissions were 14 percent lower than in the base year 1990. This is a pleasing development. In 2020, however, it must be minus 20 percent – a target that Switzerland is likely to miss, according to the Federal climate experts. This is particularly true of transport, which still accounts for one per cent of emissions above 1990 levels. The reactions are correspondingly violent. Climate protectionists are "shocked" about the 2019 balance. But, in the past, there have been several years when emissions had even increased. The most recent figures therefore reflect the climate policy reality in our country: the direction is right, the pace is not. This makes the referendum on the new CO2 law all the more important, which provides a mix of intensified and new measures. Switzerland has committed itself to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 50 percent by 2030 compared to 1990, at least three quarters of which are domestic. If Switzerland wants to have a chance to achieve this goal, the voter must be on the 13th. On June 5, a yes was placed in the urn. Even in this case, it is likely that it will be difficult to achieve halving. Especially since the population will continue to grow – with all the accompanying phenomena such as more traffic and new infrastructures. This growth will eat away part of the climate policy progress. But there is hardly any talk of that. Instead, the demand from green circles that Switzerland should no longer emit greenhouse gases by 2030 is all the louder. The new figures of the federal government show that this has nothing to do with reality.