Dispute among top associations: Banks criticise Economiesuisse for lack of commitment to CO? law The banking association wants the law that we vote on on Sunday. But Economiesuisse had let him hang in the campaign. Holger Alich,Jorgos Brouzos Jörg Gasser, here a picture from his time as Secretary of State at the Ministry of Finance. Today, as managing director of the banking association, he promotes the adoption of the CO? law. The vote on the CO? law is threatening to become tight – very close, as the latest surveys show. The Swiss banks are vehemently committed to the law, as it promises good business such as the sale of new mortgages for energy renovations. "The CO? law is crucial for Switzerland to achieve its climate goals," says Jörg Gasser, Managing Director of the Swiss Bankers Association. However, in their commitment to the CO? law, the banks feel left alone by the Economiesuisse association. "We had hoped for more support for the CO? law in the Economiesuisse campaign," says Gasser. Economiesuisse supports the CO? law, but has held back in the vote. Extra money for yes campaign Apparently, voting for the umbrella organisation is not relevant enough to use its funds, says Gasser. Because too little of Economiesuisse had come, even in the final sprint of the campaign, the bankers' association had once again collected money from banks in order to become active in the vote. A lower six-digit amount had been collected. Economiesuisse considers the criticism to be unjustified and lists a long list of activities to support the CO? law, such as media work including social media or participation in podia. The umbrella association "engages itself according to possibilities – internally and externally", says spokesman Michael Wiesner. "That was also the case with the CO2 Act. That is why we also called on our members to commit themselves to the proposal and to mobilise them internally again." The pharmaceutical and chemical industry, which is also in favour of the CO? law, stands behind the umbrella association: "We cannot understand the accusation of a lack of commitment by Economiesuisse for a yes to the CO? law," says a spokesperson of the industry association Science Industries. "But it is a matter of fact that, next Sunday, various economically relevant proposals will be put to the vote at the same time. This is a particular challenge for the financially and personnel-restricted campaign organisations of the economy." Fear of losing observers suspect, however, that Economiesuisse, out of concern to lose the vote, only engages in the CO? law with an attached hand brake. With every lost campaign, the debate threatens to flare up again, whether it still needs the expensive umbrella organisation. The climate issue has also revealed a crack in the economy. In the summer of 2020 Avenergy, the former oil association, as well as Auto-Switzerland, the Association of Auto Importers, had already declared their departure from Economiesuisse and justified the step with the conflict over the CO? law. Swiss banks, on the other hand, are fully committed to the climate issue. On the one hand, climate exposure is good for the image. Environmental organisations such as Greenpeace are putting pressure on banks to rethink their credit policy and to finance less climate-damaging activities. And ultimately, the transformation to a climate-neutral economy offers business opportunities for financial service providers. Thus, the new law ensures greater transparency in financial flows and creates incentives for building renovations for homeowners. So the banks could set off additional mortgages. In addition, asset management customers increasingly demand sustainable investment products. Last year, the volume of sustainable investments such as funds and other products grew by 31 percent to over CHF 1.5 trillion, according to the latest market study by Swiss Sustainable Finance