Action day "Strike for Future": 30,000 people demand climate-friendly society Thousands of activists participated in the "Strike for Future" on Friday. The next big day of strike and action is planned in autumn. SDA Around 30,000 people participated in the Strike for Future on Friday throughout the country. More than 100 actions and events called for a climate-friendly society. Climate strikers, trade unions, feminist collectives, non-governmental organisations, church and peace-political groups and local groups had drawn attention to various aspects of the climate crisis and together demanded an ecological and social society, said Climate Protection Switzerland. At least 100 events were held nationwide. Larger campaigns have taken place in Zurich, Berne and Lausanne. Greenhouse gas emissions would have to be reduced to net zero by 2030 at the latest, it was said in many places. In the face of the intensifying climate crisis, the climate strikers demanded immediate, decisive action. Only in this way can the Paris Agreement and the 1.5-degree target still be met. These guidelines are indispensable for preventing additional suffering and death due to the climate crisis. In Lausanne, students protested for climate protection at a rally. The more than 100 events range from a simple stand action to rallies. At 11:59 a climate alarm was triggered in several locations in Switzerland – a first highlight, as climate strike Switzerland announced. The Bernese SP-Ständerat Hans Stöckli passes activists on Berner Bahnhofplatz. (21. May 2021) It was loud and clear. With whistles, horns and pan lids, around 100 people at the St. Galler Waaghaus hit loudly climate alarm. They wanted to draw attention to the urgency of climate protection. Similar to the action in Lucerne, where around 50 mainly young people demonstrated loudly on Friday noon for a resolute policy against climate warming. With the help of pan lids, whistles and sirens, they also beat «climate alarm» and demanded «climate justice» in speech choirs. The demonstrators then lay down on the ground for about five minutes in the pouring rain. At noon, a climate alarm sounded in different places. The "Strike for Future" events had different facets. (21. May 2021) Activists in the canton of Bern demanded more effective climate protection with numerous actions. Instead of a large rally, as in previous national strike days, the organisers at the Strike for Future Day relied on decentralized small events due to corona. In Basel, about 1500 people gathered for the climate strike rally. In various speeches, a "yes" to the CO2 law was advocated, which was "very smaller", but nevertheless a step in the right direction. An information stand as part of the action day "Strike for Future" on Berner Bahnhofplatz. (21. May 2021) In the canton of Zurich, the main demo at Helvetiaplatz in Zurich attracted several hundred participants in the evening despite the initial rain. For the first time, the climate strikers had already made themselves felt in front of the Zurich District Court on the early Friday morning: there, a little more than 20 people were solidarityed with an accused climate activist. This was on trial because she had participated in the blockade of the Zurich Quai Bridge in June 2020. In Chur, various organisations called for a change in climate policy in a joint action. Hundreds of people followed the call and gathered for a demonstration. The Chur City Police praised the participants for the good observance of the masquerade duty. In Basel, too, young people are particularly committed to protecting the climate. In Lausanne, students made a strong contribution to a climate change rally. In Geneva, a committee protested against the violent land grabbing by commodity companies.The climate strike in Ticino reported live on TeleFuturo, a television station specially set up for this "Strike for Future". According to the climate strike movement, another day of strike and action is planned in autumn.