Poll on the votes: Agricultural initiatives are going to be difficult At present, there are only thin majorities for the drinking water and pesticide initiatives. This is shown by the first poll of the 13th century. ==References== The "yes" trend is clear in the Covid Act. Edgar Schuler Pure water without residue is important to the voters. In the picture a reservoir of the city of Lausanne. The people stand with a large majority behind the Corona policy of the Federal Council. This is shown by the first wave of the Tamedia poll and 20 minutes. Two thirds of the voters are currently in favour of the Covid-19 Act. This also applies to the law on terrorism. The CO2 law is more difficult: 54 percent are in favour. Support for the drinking water and pesticide initiative is also scarce. This is against an adoption in the referendum on 13 March. ==References== However, political scientist Fabio Wasserfallen, who conducts the surveys for Tamedia with Lucas Leemann, warns: "The results of the first wave are only a picture of mood, the voting struggle can still change a lot." The survey results in detail: City versus country at the drinking water initiative Today 54 percent of the proposal agrees, 43 percent reject it (the rest is still undecided). "Experience shows that people's initiatives start with a head start in the voting struggle, which then erodes the closer the voting date comes," says political scientist Wasserfallen. That is why the 54 per cent approval value for an initiative at the beginning of the vote is rather low. The results of the first wave indicate a strong polarization between the city and the country: 68 percent of the urban population agree Yes, in the country it is only 43 percent. According to expectations, left and, above all, green voters are in favour of the proposal, while supporters of SVP, FDP and the centre speak out against the proposal. Pesticides are regarded as a health hazard The initiative for Switzerland without pesticides finds a narrow majority seven weeks before the voting date. According to Lucas Leemann, 53 percent are in favour, which is also not enough for a yes on the urn. The same is true of the drinking water initiative: left-wing greens, city dwellers and women are in favour of it, while citizens, rural people and men are more opposed to it. Proponents say that pesticides are a health hazard. Opponents believe that the initiative poses a threat to security of supply. SVP against all others in the Covid Act Currently 66 percent want to approve the Covid 19 Act, only 27 percent are against it. Those who are close to the SVP reject the law: only 37 percent are in favour. In all other parties, the submission enjoys high approval. For the proponents, there is practically only one argument: 82 percent say that the law is needed to cushion the economic consequences of the pandemic. "Such a strong focus on a single argument is very unusual," says political scientist Wasserfallen. In the negative minority, the argument of the Federal Powers reaches only a value of 30 percent. According to the survey, a slight advantage for the CO? law 54 percent voted in favour of the CO? law, 43 percent opposed. The agreement is therefore rather scarce here as well. According to Fabio Wasserfallen, however, the chances are better than with the initiatives, because the popular opinion in the vote usually turns in favour of the proposals of the Federal Council and Parliament. Here, too, the city stands (65 percent approval) against land (47 percent). Proponents are convinced of the steering effect on climate-friendly behaviour. Opponents, on the other hand, find that the climate problem should not be solved by taxes and taxes, but by technical progress. Great support for the Terror Act A clear majority of 68 percent are in favour of the Act on Police Measures to Combat Terrorism, only 24 percent are against it. This template also polarises strongly according to parties: Only supporters of the Greens and the SP speak out against the proposal. In the country and with age, the law has a stronger support. Opponents argue that the law opens the arbitrariness door and gate. On the other hand, supporters say that the police have too few opportunities to take precautionary action against terrorists today.