The CO2 law could fail Tamedia survey In the FDP, the base rehearses the uprising: a clear majority rejects the proposal. Four weeks before the vote on 13 October, the Commission adopted a proposal for a directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes. According to the opinion poll of "20 minutes" and Tamedia, clear trends are emerging in June: In the second wave of the survey, the current narrow yes on drinking water and the pesticide initiative has been turned into a no. The CO2 law also loses support, only exactly 50 percent say yes or rather yes. On the other hand, the Covid-19 Act and the police measures against terrorism are both supported by a stable two-thirds majority. The FDP was the first party to issue the Ja-Parole for the CO2 Act. Already last October, a party assembly had supported the submission in the ratio of three to one. "I am glad and proud that the delegates are so clear about the CO2 law," said party president Petra Gössi at the time. Thanks to the "hard work" of the FDP in parliament, it was a "voluntary law". Now, however, Gössi is abandoned by the voters of her party: Satte 61 percent reject the proposal. However, only SVP supporters are even clearer – 84 percent reject the CO2 Act. This insurrection of the FDP base could be a decisive match: Overall, the approval of the law has fallen from 54 percent at the end of April to 50 percent today. It could be close. But political scientist Fabio Wasserfallen, who conducts the polls for Tamedia with Lucas Leemann, does not yet see the race for the law lost: "There is still a lot left in the vote to familiarise the supporters of the parties with the slogans."The weight of the youth Moreover, according to waterfalls, the no-potential of the bourgeois parties is already practically exhausted today. "There can hardly be any no votes here." On the other hand, there is still a yes-voice potential at the centre-left. This is exactly what is happening now in the drinking water and pesticide initiative. The approval has fallen from 54 percent to 48 in drinking water and from 53 percent to 49 in the pesticide initiative. It is remarkable for the political scientist Wasserfallen that the young voters do not live up to their image as the environmentally conscious generation at all. In fact, the support for the two agricultural initiatives is growing from age to age. Only 31 percent of 18- to 34-year-olds agree with the drinking water initiative. For those over 65, it is 58 percent. After an easy home game it looks like the Federal Council in the anti-terror law. The approval has fallen only slightly from 68 percent in the first wave to 67 percent. The Covid-19 Act is similar: in this case, approval has increased slightly from 66 to 67 percent. It is remarkable, however, that only one argument counts for the approving majority: that, if no, the state aid funds would also fall away and thus the companies affected by the anti-Corona measures would be left empty-handed.