Fact check on the SRF "Arena": Is the CO? law a cost driver? According to the advocates, the law strengthens climate protection and creates jobs. Opponents warn against high costs for the population and prohibitions. We've checked statements on the vote. Stefan Häne,Martin Läubli,Yannick Wiget "Eight billion Swiss francs flow abroad for oil and natural gas alone": Environment Minister Simonetta Sommaruga assumes that some of these foreign investments would flow into Switzerland with the new CO? law. ==References== The people vote on the revised CO2 Act, which aims to halve Switzerland's greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared to 1990. An alliance of the oil and automotive industries – supported by the SVP, the Home Owners' Association and Gastrosuisse – has successfully taken the referendum against the proposal. Opponents argue that the cost of heating, mobility and flying are increasing, weakening the Swiss economy. It also burdened families, car commuters, the rural and mountain population and the trade. The supporters – the Federal Council, all political groups except the SVP, the cantons, the municipal and municipal associations, environmental organisations, the mobility associations TCS and VCS, Economiesuisse and other business associations – contradict this. According to them, the law strengthens climate protection, reduces dependence on foreign oil companies and creates jobs domestically. The liberal framework would leave companies room for manoeuvre and freedom of choice. In the SRF "Arena" the supporters discussed among other things: The initiative was opposed, among other things: "The CO2 law changes zero in climate change."The check: The share of small Switzerland in the global emissions of greenhouse gases is indeed small, and accordingly the influence on global climate change is small. However, this view has been obsolete since the conclusion of the Paris Climate Treaty: Switzerland has ratified the agreement. And there, under Article 3, "all parties" – no matter how big the outburst – are required to "take ambitious efforts" which must be increased over time. Industrialized countries are ahead of developing countries. The conclusion: Although the effect of the CO2 law on global climate change is physically not zero, it is certainly marginal. Nevertheless, Switzerland must assume its responsibilities together with all other States parties, in accordance with the Paris climate agreements. From 2050, all nations must be climate neutral, so according to climate research, climate targets can only be achieved. "We have no prohibitions in this law." The check: The new CO2 law does not contain explicit prohibitions. However, it attracts the screw in the building area in such a way that it becomes increasingly difficult from 2023 to replace a fossil heating with a new oil or gas heating. Although existing buildings may continue to be heated with oil or natural gas. However, if the heating is replaced during a renovation, a new upper limit applies for the CO2 emission: 20 kilograms CO2 per square meter heated area. This maximum value will then be reduced by five kilograms every five years. In 2028 it was still 15 kilograms, in 2033 it was 10, in 2038 it was 5. In 2043, the limit is 0 kilograms. However, according to the Federal Office for Energy, the owners of most of the buildings concerned can reach the limit values of 20 or 15 kilograms by 2032 at least with solutions that combine a heat pump with a fossil heating system. In this way, even quite inefficient buildings can continue to rely at least on a partially fossil solution. The conclusion: Müller's statement is correct in the sense of the word, but with the building area it hides an element in the new law, which amounts to a ban on fossil heaters when replaced. "We now have to compensate 90 percent of CO2 emissions." The check: Fuel importers already have to compensate for some of the CO2 emissions from transport with climate protection projects. This is 12 percent. This compensation rate increases with the new law – to a maximum of 90 percent. However, the increase is not in one step, but successively. The Federal Council determines the individual stages. The decree on the law, which until 15 December, was still in force. The plan shows in detail: for the years 2022 to 2024 the compensation rate is on average 20 percent, after which it rises to 60 percent (2025 to 2027) and 70 percent (2028-2029). In 2030, it will be 75 percent. It is unclear when and whether it will reach the maximum rate of 90 percent at all. It depends on whether Switzerland achieves its CO2 reduction targets. If it proves that she won't make it, the Federal Council will adjust the compensation rates. The conclusion: Bamert's statement is sharpened. The new law does not immediately require fuel importers to compensate 90 percent of their emissions, nor is it certain that they will ever have to do so. "The cost per year is 720 million Swiss francs." The check: Bamert means the additional costs incurred in the fuel sector. How does he get that number? It estimates the annual fuel consumption in Switzerland to about 6 billion litres, which is roughly true. This value is multiplied by the 12 raps per litre, which fuel importers can increase because of the compensation of their CO2 emissions. These 12 raps per litre, however, constitute only a legal upper limit: More than this amount, importers at the pump must not hit on it – and this only from 2025; until then, there are new 10 raps. Today, the maximum possible surcharge is 5 rappen per litre. However, importers do not take advantage of this margin, in fact it has been only about 1.5 centimetres up to now. The conclusion: that petrol and diesel will be introduced with the new law is considered as safe, especially since the importers will have to make at least 15 percent of the CO2 compensation in Germany from 2024 and at least 20 percent of the CO2 compensation in 2025 – i.e. where it is usually more expensive to save CO2. However, it is still unclear how high the impact will be. This depends, among other things, on how the cost of compensation for CO2 will develop and whether importers will pass the surcharge completely, only partially or not at all on drivers. "The CO2 law is social, fair and family-friendly." Check: Sommaruga expects an additional 100 francs per year and family. It takes average values, for example, for mobility consumption and living space. The opponents argue that there is hardly a family that is exactly the average. Therefore, in their calculations, they come up with additional costs per family and year for amounts of CHF 1000 in some cases – but they do not say that there are also households that are moving forward in the end. Imark spoke of an average value of 600 francs in the show. The fact is that some of the CO and air ticket taxes are distributed back to the population. Thus, regardless of income and lifestyle, everyone receives exactly the same amount of money back – this will reward environmentally friendly behaviour financially. A recent study by Swisscleantech shows that the law is the hardest hit by rich environmental offenders. However, families with low income and high consumption also have to expect appreciable additional costs, for example if they live decentralisedly in an ill-insulated old house with oil heating and have to drive far away by car. In a case study, the study estimates this to 470 Swiss francs per year in 2030, 380 Swiss francs more than today. The conclusion: The law is quite fair on the whole. The hardest hit is rich households, which often live on a large scale ecologically. However, the consequences are also noticeable for people with smaller incomes. It is therefore beautiful to call it social and fair. "The CO2 emissions per capita have decreased significantly." The check: In 1990, Swiss citizens still had 8 tonnes of greenhouse gases per capita, and today it is still about 5.5 tonnes. This means that the value is below the global average of 6 tonnes. However, it is several times higher than in developing countries. However, according to a tweet by ETH climate researcher Reto Knutti (also present in the Arena studio), Imark shows a completely misguided curve in which the scaling for the per capita output is not correct (wrong set indication) and the curve has been extrapolated simply by 2030, i.e. is a pure assumption and suggests a strong decrease in the per capita output over the next ten years. On the other hand, spectators of the arena only see the curve, but not the information on the axes. They will be led astray by it. 1/ In @SRF #ARENA, @ChristianImark argues with a multiple false graph that Switzerland has massively reduced its per capita emissions and that a #CO2 law is unnecessary.Fact check: pic.twitter.com/FNsrdquwBf— Reto Knutti (@Knutti_ETH) May 15, 2021 For comparison of countries and responsibility for climate protection, per capita figures are useful. Nature, on the other hand, takes no account of this, since absolute values are required, as in the Paris climate agreement. Switzerland is less well placed here: domestic greenhouse gas emissions have fallen less than per capita since 1990, by 14 percent. Switzerland is thus missing the target of 20 percent by 2020. The conclusion: Although statistically correct, the statement is in fact correct, but irrelevant in the context of Switzerland's climate targets under the Paris Agreement. "Eight billion Swiss francs flow abroad for oil and natural gas alone." The check: This figure is undisputed. The Minister of the Environment wants to show that in Switzerland, dependency on foreign countries would fall and that many additional jobs would be created if part of this foreign investment were to flow into our country. It is obvious that the number of additional jobs will increase due to investments in non-fossil technologies in Switzerland. How many new jobs will be created, but up to now there is no reliable data on this. Monika Rühl, Director of the Swiss Economic Association Economiesuisse, says: "With innovations and efficient technologies, the Swiss economy can make a significant contribution to reducing greenhouse gases and thus solving the climate problem." However, more than industry, the local industry is likely to benefit. For example, through energy renovations of buildings, construction of district heating networks, expansion of photovoltaics or construction of charging stations for electric cars. But there are also losers, such as the fossil industry or distributors of fuel and fuel. However, this does not completely eliminate the dependence on foreign raw materials, such as the production of batteries for electric cars or possibly the import of synthetic fuels. It is also open how large the import of electricity will be after the exit from nuclear power and if the traffic is completely electrified as intended. The conclusion: The statement of the Minister for the Environment is correct, how great the dependence on raw materials from abroad will be in the post-fossil age, will be. "The best thing is that the climate fund itself is abolished: if no one needs fossil fuels, there is no money left in the fund." The check: The climate fund is a new money pot that arises with the CO2 law. It feeds on fossil fuels from a part of the CO2 levy. A maximum of one third of the revenue – a maximum of CHF 450 million per year – flows into the fund, with which the federal government intends to continue the building renovation programme and finance other climate protection measures, for example the construction of charging stations for electric cars in multi-family buildings. In addition, a maximum of half of the revenue from the planned air ticket tax. In total, the federal government expects revenues of about CHF 1 billion per year. The conclusion: Wismer-Felder's statement is imprecise. While it may be that one day in Switzerland fossil fuels are no longer needed and that air travel is also declining or alternative propulsion is standard for aircraft. Then the fund would actually empty. But that does not mean that no one needs fossil fuels anymore. Because from road traffic no money flows into the fund. The new CO2 law sets the lever elsewhere: It increases the CO2 charges for new cars, among other things.