The catch with the climate calculation Suddenly climate-neutral Anyone who blows a lot of CO2 into the air will be put on the pillory. So many companies are betting on compensation to rebalance their balance sheet. But the system is problematic. Angelika Gruber The headlines of some companies sound almost too good to be true: Swiss cement company Holcim has developed a climate-neutral concrete to make construction more sustainable. Those who fly with Easyjet don't have to worry about pollution anymore. And there is also good news for car lovers: If the new CO2 law is adopted, driving is almost climate-neutral. But what sounds great and is well meant could turn out to be a promise that is hard to keep. The reason for this is that the above-mentioned promises are all about compensating for the CO2 emissions generated elsewhere. There are two problems: In the current system, CO2 reductions may be double calculated. This suggests a higher reduction in emissions to consumers than is effective. In addition, the prices for compensation are currently low, so companies may lack the incentive to reduce CO2 themselves. How compensation works In order to achieve their environmental goals, companies ideally try to reduce their CO2 emissions by their own efforts – for example by switching to green energy or climate-friendly transport. However, not all CO2 sources can be eliminated at present: When flying, the climate-damaging gas is created, as is the case with the production of concrete. So companies like Easyjet or Holcim at least partially rely on compensation to achieve their climate goals. For each tonne of CO2 that companies cause, they buy compensation certificates. These come from a climate protection project, in which the CO2 is either removed from the air or ensured that it does not even get into the atmosphere. This is done, for example, through the protection or afforestation of rainforests, hydroelectric and solar power plant projects or more efficient cooking stations in developing countries. Because there it is easier to save CO2 by simple means. And it is cheaper for companies to participate in such projects: because the price of one tonne of CO2 equivalent abroad is significantly lower than in Germany. The problem of crediting organisations such as Myclimate or South Pole, many of which are based in Switzerland, act as intermediaries between the climate protection projects and the companies. The calculation for the global climate is above all up to date. But the system has its pitfalls: the prerequisite is that the savings are not double-counted – in other words, in the country where the project takes place and in the company's climate account, which buys certificates. But this has not been guaranteed since the Paris 2015 climate agreement. For the first time, developing countries have also committed themselves to the goal of limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees and setting their own climate targets. This means that theoretically two parties refer to one and the same reduction and claim it for themselves. WWF expert Patrick Hofstetter sees this as a problem. "At the moment, no certificates meet the requirements to ensure that emission reductions are not double-counted," he says. "In the past, developed countries simply bought certificates from developing countries that did not have their own climate targets," says Hofstetter. This was allowed by the Kyoto Protocol with the Emissions Trading Scheme at the time. However, since developing countries had set their own domestic climate targets, new accounting rules have been needed. "The certificates now help the host country to achieve the climate goals it has set itself," says Hofstetter. An exception was bilateral agreements, such as those concluded in Switzerland with Peru or Ghana. In future, Peru and Ghana would explicitly waive the allocation of CO2 compensation to their own goals. This guarantees that this will only be counted once. According to the Myclimate Foundation, the current status of the Paris Agreement may lead to double counting of compensation. "The new calculation systems are only being built up. We are in a kind of transition phase," says a speaker. From Myclimate's point of view, however, a possible double counting is not a big problem. It is important that companies were involved in climate protection and financed compensation projects at all. «The favorable options are exhausted at some point» Nevertheless, Myclimate also wants an early solution to the problem. At the UN Climate Change Conference in Glasgow at the beginning of November, countries could agree on specific rules to avoid double counting in the future. Myclimate estimates that until they are put into practice, about three years could pass. For the time being, companies are relying on the existing system: Easyjet acknowledges on the website: "We know that compensation is not perfect." Nevertheless, this is currently the best way to deal with the CO2 generated during the flight. In addition, there has been no double counting at Easyjet so far, explains one speaker. The developing countries have set their emission targets from 2021 and Easyjet has invested in emission credits from the years before. The new rules wanted to take the airline into account when selecting its compensation projects. Environmental economist Krysiak sees the compensation projects as critical for another reason: "Companies do not avoid their own emissions, but pay someone else for it." Due to the currently very low costs for such compensation projects, companies lack the economic incentive to invest in their own CO2 reduction. "Today, compensation is much cheaper than avoiding CO2 from local companies," he says. But this is likely to change. If demand for compensation projects is increasing, prices are also rising. "All the cheap options are exhausted at some point. Then you have to start with the nearest cheaper ones. And at some point you are at a point where the compensation abroad is no longer calculated," says Krysiak. Companies are therefore well advised to only rely on it in a transitional phase. Holcim emphasizes that the company's focus is not on compensation, but on reducing CO2 in its products and production. "Our goal is clear: we want to produce climate-neutral and fully recyclable building materials," says one speaker. According to Holcim, climate-neutral concrete is an important step in this direction. Compared to standard concrete, it causes ten percent less CO2. The remaining CO2 emissions will be compensated.