«Links» accusation against broadcasters: SVP threatens with popular initiative against SRF After discussing the failed EU framework agreement in the «Club» without the People's Party, the SVP now threatens with political consequences for Swiss television. /red View of the roof of the Swiss Radio and Television SRF building with the broadcast station of "Meteo Switzerland" in Zurich. (17. January 2018) The show «Club» from last Tuesday brought the barrel to overflow. "Instead of fulfilling the constitutional mandate and contributing to free political opinion, Swiss television is increasingly becoming a left-green NGO activist channel," writes the SVP in a press release. The trigger was the fact that the country's strongest party was not allowed to participate in the debate on the failed framework agreement. Since then it is clear that the SVP wants to take political action against SRF. In concrete terms, National Councillor Thomas Matter now speaks to the "Sunday View": Plan a People's Initiative. First discussions on the party leadership committee had already taken place. "Since the no to 'No Billag', the left-hander has only become worse at SRF. After the ‹club› broadcast to the framework agreement, the point is reached for us as we act», explains Matter, explaining the decision to the newspaper. He adds: "If a political broadcast on the CO2 law were to take place without the Greens, they would run amok. Rightly!» Whether the desired proposal actually comes to the urn remains to be seen, the project is still at the beginning and the party committees still have to agree to the initiative. Halving the fees "It is a shame that we have been fighting against the framework agreement on the front line for years, but are not invited by the SRF," says SVP National Councillor Gregor Rutz. In recent weeks, the SRF has repeatedly reported very unilaterally and politically not neutrally. "The longer, the more I get the impression that the personal opinion of the moderator often also flows into the reporting." For Rutz, a fee reduction or fee halving at the SRF would be possible. "The SRF must focus on its core task, the public service. This is also possible with a half as high budget levy." SRF speaks of pressure attempt On Wednesday, the SRF was given its opinion on the accusations of the SVP. It is again a pressure attempt by the party that such would accumulate in recent times. "In this context, it is important to stress that we do not allow the parties to prescribe who we invite to which broadcast," wrote Gregor Meier, Deputy Editor-in-Chief Video at SRF. Meier also takes a position on criticism of the supposedly "left-green" orientation of the station. These allegations, too, have no basis. SRF reports as with any submission: With a well-balanced "vote arena" and with "daily show" reports on the yes committee, the no committee and the Federal Council. "The SRF is not a party medium - from no party," says Meier.