Opinions No to an expensive, ineffective and anti-social law Patrick Eperon Economic Committee "No to the CO2 law" To read or hear Madam Federal Councillor Sommaruga or a good part of the supporters of the new CO2 law, which will be put to the vote on June 13, the citizen may have the impression that this law would only be winners, which is obviously impossible: there is no magic tax that would ultimately allow everyone to receive more money than he or she had to pay in advance by paying this tax! Therefore, each individual should calculate immediately what he or she should pay in respect of the taxes set out in the new CO2 law; long before he or she is reimbursed a certain amount through his or her sickness fund, due to a partial redistribution of the proceeds of taxes. Similarly, each head of enterprise should now budget for the additional expenses that he or she would have to incur under the new CO2 law upon its entry into force; well before relying on the repayment of a certain amount through the AVS fund to which his or her business is affiliated, due to a partial redistribution of the proceeds of taxes. The new CO2 law sets different taxes. Most of this is an increase of 12 cents per litre of gasoline (which would add to the 4 cents in force since 1 January this year), as well as an increase of almost 30 cents per litre of fuel oil or some 3.8 cents per kWh of gas, a means of heating that is widely encouraged for years in urban areas. Finally, each passenger of a airline aircraft (once out of the pandemic) should pay a new fee per flight, i.e. 240 francs for a family of four people travelling to Morocco. The CO2 law is therefore expensive for a large part of households that own at least one car or heat up oil or gas, or go on vacation at least once a year by plane: a large majority of Swiss, Genevan or Vaudois, in the midst of economic crisis Covid-19! The CO2 law will not save the climate! As a reminder, Switzerland is only responsible for one thousandth of global CO2 emissions. However, the CO2 law could only lead to a reduction of half a million global CO2 emissions. That is why climate activists point out that this law is ineffective. Finally, and perhaps more importantly, it should be stressed that CO2 taxes are consumption taxes which, by definition, are not linked to the income of those who have to pay them. This means that CO2 taxes are antisocial, as the Economic Committee "No to the CO2 law" and climate strikers opposed to it stress. In short, the CO2 law is based on punishment and not innovation, which has contributed significantly to the reduction of CO2 emissions per capita in Switzerland by some 24% over the past decade. Face-to-face CO2 law: what to vote for? The Chambers approved the CO2 law, but a referendum against it was launched and the Swiss vote was required on this subject on 13 June. Intended to bring Switzerland into line with the Paris Climate Agreement, this text is defended here by the Geneva MP Alexandre de Senarclens and fought by the communications and political campaign delegate of the Centre patronal in Lausanne.