Will the price of gasoline really rise by 12 cents? Opponents caution against an increase in pump rates if yes on 13 June. Not so sure, according to fuel importers. Julien Culet is the clumsy argument of the opponents of the CO2 law: in case of acceptance of the text on 13 June, road users will see the price of gasoline increase by 12 cents per litre. The obligation for importers of petroleum products to compensate for CO2 emissions and the possibility for these companies to pass some of this compensation on to their tariffs would undermine the carrier of motorists. However, the consequences of a yes in the ballot box are not so obvious to estimate. What does the law provide? As a result of the legislative review, oil importers are increasingly required to offset their greenhouse gas emissions. By 2030, this compensation will have to rise to 90% of the emissions from the transport sector. In return, the law will allow them to increase the price of a litre of gasoline to a maximum of 12 cents per litre. This possibility already exists because, since 1 January, importers can apply a 5 cent mark-up. The Federal Office for the Environment (OFEV) states that they do not reach this ceiling, the increase due to the offset of CO2 emitted is rather of the order of 1.5 cents. Of the six companies surveyed, only three agreed to respond. Shell and Avia remain vague on the actual impact in 2021, while BP indicates that this compensation – together with the increase in the tax on mineral oils – has already led to a 5 cent increase at the pump. This increase will then be phased in as this limit will not be reached until 2025. From 5 cents at present, the ceiling would increase to 10 cents the time of a transition period. It should be noted that the law allows the Federal Council to temporarily reduce the increase "if economic necessity is proven". Are prices going to jump? The increase in the price of petrol will depend mainly on the willingness of importers to weigh compensation on motorists. In this, companies do not pronounce themselves. "In case of acceptance of the law, the additional tax will automatically be carried over to the price of the fuel. As far as price changes are concerned, we will rely on those practised by competition, as usual," Avia informs. Avenergy, which represents the interests of importers of liquid fuels and fuels, considers that "10 and 12 cents per litre will be fair enough to meet the increasing clearing obligation," reports its director Roland Bilang. However, the impact on the price applied is nuanced: "As is well known, this depends on other factors, including the price of crude oil and transport costs." Will the increase seriously penalise households? For those opposed to the text, that is clear. "The 5 cents that can already be applied are enough. With the new law, this will constitute an increase of 8 cents, if VAT is taken into account. There is no need to penalize the economy again, especially in a time when everyone draws the language, criticises the national advisor Jean-Pierre Grin (UDC/VD). This will target rural residents who need their car to move because of lack of public transport." "There should be an impact but it will be difficult to really feel," replied Philippe Nantermod (PLR/VS). The modernisation of the car fleet means that our cars will consume less and so, in the end, the bill will not necessarily be higher." The OFEV states that the maximum increase of 12 cents would be "less than the price fluctuations of recent months. In November 2020, the average monthly cost of a litre of unleaded water was 1 fr. 39. In February 2021, a litre of unleaded water cost 1 fr. 54. What is the use of CO2 compensation? Importers have an obligation to offset CO2 emissions by financing climate protection projects. They are currently to be introduced in Switzerland, but the new law will also make it possible to do so abroad. These investments are made through the Klik Foundation, which finances projects in the construction, industry, transport and agriculture sectors. In French-speaking Switzerland, for example, the Foundation has been involved in the modernisation of buses in the municipality of Sierre, in Valais, the development of a wood heating network in Montreux, or the transition to 100% renewable energy for EPFL campus. Oil companies should not automatically apply the increase, but will do so in the light of market developments. "The modernisation of the car fleet will make our cars consume less and therefore, in the end, the bill will not necessarily be higher." Philippe Nantermod National Councillor (PLR/VS) Road Federation angry against Bern Does the Federal Office for the Environment (OFEV) indirectly campaign for the CO2 law? This is the conviction of Pierre-André Page. The National Councillor (UDC/FR) calls on the Federal Council following the publication of a report on pollution in Switzerland: "There are figures hidden and that shockes me. I would like the OFEV to broadcast them before the vote on 13 June. It is a duty of truth and transparency."In this document, OFEV notes a slight decrease in greenhouse gas emissions in Switzerland in 2019. It pins the transport sector as a bad pupil: "If the trend continues, the transport sector will miss the target of less than 10% until 2020." It depends on how road traffic is calculated, in response to RoadSwiss, the front line. Its director, Olivier Fantino, believes that these are "partial figures in the sense that they do not take into account the CO2 emissions of 2020, nor the compensation that road traffic finances through legal obligations." By integrating the effect of these compensation measures and the evolution of traffic last year, the picture is different. Transport has a 2% decrease in its greenhouse gas emissions in 2019 compared to 1990. They will likely achieve their reduction target of –10% over 2020. The coronavirus went through this, but the sector, which has taken a stand against the CO2 law, believes that its impact, lasting, is to be taken into account. The OFEV is not allowed to attempt any manipulation. "In the greenhouse gas inventory, emissions must be reported where they occur," says a spokesperson, who also explains that it will not be possible to calculate transport emissions from 2020 until 2022. The small sentence that set the powders on fire remains: "To significantly reduce emissions, it is essential to strengthen the measures, as provided for in the CO2 law," says OFEV. "In addition, this report contains a recommendation for a vote!" said Olivier Fantino. Lise Bailat Bern