Flying and pollute less with a new air transport tax Researchers at the Enterprise for Society centre reveal the main effects of a possible air ticket tax. The new CO2 law includes a tax on airline tickets. Researchers at the Enterprise for Society (E4S), an institution from UNIL, IMD and EPFL, have just published an in-depth study on the effects of such a tax. Conclusion in case of approval by the people: we will steal less, we will pollute less. Brief reminder of the nature of this tax. From Switzerland, in economy class, an additional 30 francs will be required for a short-haul flight, 60 francs for a medium-haul flight and 90 francs for a long-haul flight. In the higher classes, an additional 30 francs will be required for each category of flight. Logical question: what will be the effects of such a regime on air transport demand and the climate impact of this industry? "Our simulations suggest that the scheduled fee schedule would reduce the number of passengers from 13 to 21%. After the Covid-19 experience, however, the elasticity of demand for air travel should be closer to – 21%. In particular for work-related trips", says Philippe Thalmann, one of the authors of the White Paper on the introduction of a tax on airline tickets in Switzerland. The contribution of this facility to the environment would not be negligible either. "Air transport CO2 emissions would decrease by 16%," experts from E4S estimate. Emissions increase These data alone take on a particular dimension in view of certain realities of air transport in Switzerland. In this country, aviation is the only sector whose CO2 emissions have continued to grow over the past decade. This, however, does not make it clear that the most important players in the industry are doing nothing. "Over the past 25 years, we have made our flights more sustainable and efficient. We will renew our fleet this fall with five Airbus A320 neo. They emit up to 15% less CO2 than previous models," says the Executive Director of Easyjet Switzerland, Jean-Marc Thévenaz. Philippe Rodrik "The scheduled fee schedule would reduce the number of passengers from 13 to 21%." Philippe Thalmann Co-author of the "White Paper" d'E4S