On the climate, the PLR is dropped by its young section CO2 law While the party has fought to take over the campaign, the Young PLR leave the freedom to vote. Malaise. There are some absences that are very quickly noticed. On Thursday, the youth sections of the country's main parties launched their campaign for a yes to the CO2 law submitted to the vote on 13 June. In order to symbolize the importance of this project, which is supposed to limit global warming, they sent representatives who have not yet reached the age of 18. Two parties, however, lacked the call: the UDC Youth, but especially the PLR Youth. For if within the Agrarian party the rejection clearly prevails, it is the opposite in the PLR, which is fully committed to the "yes". "As we are divided, we leave the freedom to vote," explains Nicolas Jutzet, Vice-President of Youth PLR. That young people thus leave their elders behind leaves no one indifferent in the LRP. "It doesn't please us," admits his general secretary, Fanny Noghero. This law is primarily intended to preserve the environment for future generations. It is a pity that the main concerned do not follow us." "Neither drama nor surprise" However, Fanny Noghero relativizes this fracture. "This is neither a drama nor a surprise. Young PLRs often have more libertarian positions than the party." Evidence with the new police measures against terrorism, also put to the vote on 13 June. The youth section advocates no, while the project is led by Federal Councillor PLR Karin Keller-Sutter. Within the Young PLR, you stay straight in your boots. "Global warming is an important issue, but some of the answers provided by the law are not defensible," says Nicolas Jutzet, who recalls that the project also divides the Swiss party. While it acknowledges that the PLR has committed itself to incorporating a liberal approach into the text, it points to measures that will increase bureaucracy and risk creating additional costs. "An attempt is being made to impose new behaviours through bans and paternalistic demands," said the Young PLR in a press release. But the worst was avoided. In fact, manoeuvres were carried out behind the scenes to remove the freedom to vote, while the non could have won. What would have been a disavowal for the presidency. Florent Quiquerez