Cities or countryside, who will pay the bill? To reduce CO2 emissions, the revision introduces taxes on fuel oil, gasoline or theft. The point on the winners and losers. Florent Quiquerez Bern On one side, there is the fight against global warming, on the other side its effect on the purse. Between supporters and opponents of the new CO2 law, the war of numbers rages over new taxes on petrol, heating or theft. Simonetta Sommaruga, a federal adviser in charge of the case, speaks of an additional annual cost of 100 francs for a family of four. In the event of virtuous behaviour, the bill could even be reduced to zero. Fountain, retort the opponents, for whom the bill will be much more expensive. The UDC refers to an additional cost of up to 1000 francs per year for a family of four. The people in the countryside are the ones who would suffer the most. Who's right, who's wrong? To find out, we have identified the four emblematic points of the law that was put to the vote on 13 June. And, in this city-country match, losers and winners get confused. 1. Gasoline: the rural losers Life in the countryside is often dependent on one or even two cars. On average, distances travelled in rural areas are longer than in agglomerations, according to the 2015 figures of the Federal Statistical Office (OFS) on mobility. The increase in the price of petrol will thus affect the inhabitants of the peripheries more, provided that they have not invested in an electric vehicle. However, this increase is not very clear. In the law, the Federal Council does not impose price increases, but allows importers of petrol and diesel to have a greater impact on motorists on the new targets set by Bern to offset CO2 emissions from transport. The maximum cap is now 12 cents per litre. In theory, this could result in an additional 180 fr bill for a vehicle with average fuel consumption and mileage. But not sure that importers use this margin of manoeuvre. Today, to remain competitive, they take only 1.5 cents per litre, while it could puncture up to 5 cents. 2. Heating: ball in the center With the new law, the Federal Council can increase the tax on fossil fuels (mazout, natural gas, coal) to 210 francs per tonne of CO2, compared to 120 today. That would be 50 cents per litre of fuel oil versus 30 today. LUDC believes that rural housing is larger and therefore more penalized. According to the NZZ, which cites a study by Wüest Partner, there are no significant differences between urban and rural areas. The question remains of the price to change the system: 100-000 to 150-000 francs, must be invested for a complete renovation of the house, according to the UDC – and in particular for its insulation. If aid is provided, more owners are found in peripheral regions. An argument to be counterbalanced with the share of dwellings that no longer use fossil fuels. According to the 2015 OFS building figures, more than 1 million buildings are still heated with gas or oil. Proportionally, there are more in urban cantons and less in rural areas. In Valais, 53% of households no longer use fossil fuels. This is 30% in the canton of Vaud and only 13% in Geneva. These households will win with the new law. According to the Federal Office for the Environment (OFEV), a family of four who does not heat oil or natural gas will be reimbursed CHF 348 per year from the CO2 tax. 3. Flights: the losing urbans The new airfare tax will be 30 to 120 francs per flight. And on this point too, it is more urban people who will break down. According to OFS, the inhabitants of cities are more likely to fly than those of the peripheries – almost one flight per year on average for the former, about one every two years for the latter – and fly further. In the case of the airline ticket tax, only the 10% of the population who use this most frequent means of travel should ultimately pay a surcharge, says Confederation. The remaining 90% of the population would benefit financially. More than half of the proceeds of this tax will be distributed evenly to the population. This amount must be deducted from health insurance premiums, regardless of the number of flights performed. Each inhabitant should receive 60 francs in return. 4. The climate fund: ball in the centre This fund will be financed by one third of the CO2 tax on fuels and by half of the tax on airline tickets. Other sources will still pay, like half of the penalties paid by importers whose vehicles exceed Bern's CO2 emission limits. It is difficult to say whether it will benefit the cities or the countryside, as the beneficiaries are multiple. Mountain regions will receive support for measures to prevent the dangers of climate change. The cities could also find themselves there, in the case of, for example, the acquisition of electric buses or the installation of a remote heating network better suited to urban centres. Federal votes