Owners, tenants: what financial impact? The former fear an increase in charges, and the latter fear that it will be passed on to their rents. Fabrice Breithaupt Everywhere in the world, the hour is at the emergency climate. Earth is warming up. The overall consequences could be catastrophic. More than 190 countries have signed the Paris Agreement. The Treaty entered into force in 2016 and aims to contain global global warming below 2°C below pre-industrial levels by 2100. Switzerland, which has ratified it, intends to do its part and contribute to the global collective effort. It is in this context that the revision of the current federal CO2 law, which is due to come into force on 1 January 2022, takes place. However, the measures it envisages raise concerns about effects, particularly financial effects, particularly in housing. Hence the referendum launched against this revision. And on which the Sovereign is called to vote on June 13. But what exactly does this revision provide for? What could be the financial impact on real estate owners and tenants? Elements of response. Why this revision of the CO2 law? Our country, of alpine nature, warms twice as fast as the rest of the world. The melting of our glaciers is as much the consequence as the evidence. The revision of the CO2 law aims to reduce greenhouse gas emissions (responsible for rising temperatures) by at least 50% by 2030 compared to 1990. What are the main measures in the revised CO2 Act that relate to housing? The revision provides for new rules and incentives for both imports, industry, transport and housing, based on the polluter pays principle (see also next page). Their aim is to promote climate-friendly behaviour and consumption. The housing stock is directly affected by this revision. And because: in Switzerland, a quarter of the CO2 emissions are produced by buildings. The new law provides for the possibility for the Federal Council to increase the current tax on fossil fuels (mazout, natural gas and coal) to 210 francs per tonne of CO2 (about 50 cents per litre of fuel oil and 4.2 cents per kWh of natural gas), compared with 120 fr./tonne of CO2 today (about 30 cents per litre of fuel oil and 2.4 cents per kWh of natural gas). These fossil fuels are used for heating buildings. The only condition for a possible increase in the tax is that CO2 emissions do not decrease sufficiently. It should be noted that two thirds of the proceeds of this tax will be redistributed to the population and the economy. The remainder will be provided to the Climate Fund, which is a new development and is intended to provide financial support for climate-friendly investments. The new law also aims to reduce the use of fossil fuels in buildings. CO2 emissions from buildings will have to decrease by at least 50% by 2026/2027 compared to 1990. When changing a heating system to oil or gas, existing buildings will not emit more than 20 kilos of CO2 per square metre of living space per year. This maximum limit value will be reduced by 5 kg of CO2 every five years. It is the cantons that set standards for buildings. But it is the owners who decide on the measures themselves that enable them to comply with these limit values (solar energy, biogas, heat pumps, wood heating, for example). The Federal Office for the Environment (OFEV) states that the CO2 law provides for financial aid. This will allow owners, as required, to apply for support through the Climate Fund. The Federal Republic of Germany, which has been set up by the Federal Republic of Germany, is now in the process of implementing the aid. And that investment costs are deductible from taxes in most cantons. New buildings will no longer have to emit CO2 from fossil fuels. What are the criticisms of opponents of the revision of the CO2 law? Their ranks are mainly UDC, some associations from the economic, industrial, energy, automotive and real estate sectors, and GastroSwitzerland. For the "No to the CO2 Law" Committee, this revision is ineffective. It believes that Switzerland, which is "already exemplary in climate policy" and which "is only responsible for one thousandth of global greenhouse gas emissions", could, with the planned measures, reduce only "half a thousandth" of global CO2 emissions. The Committee also considers this review costly, as it increases the tax on oil and gas, which are used for heating housing, which affects owners and tenants. According to him, the extra cost for a family of four can exceed 1000 francs per year. Alarmist, he believes that many owners, unable to finance the acquisition and installation of a renewable energy heating system, "will probably be forced to leave their own home". Owners who consent to the installation of such heating systems will pass on the investment costs to rents, while the increase in heating costs due to the increase in the CO2 tax will be passed on to rental charges. All this leads to an increase in rents, warns the Committee. Furthermore, many buildings are not technically or structurally suitable for renewable heating systems. What is the position of the real estate community? The French Federation of Real Estate (FRI), which brings together most of the real estate chambers in our region (which defend the rights and interests of the owners), leaves its members the freedom to vote. "The individual situations of the French-speaking owners are diverse in terms of energy," explains his committee. For its part, the Swiss Union of Real Estate Professionals (USPI Switzerland), if it recalls that it is in favour of the energy clean-up of buildings and that their CO2 emissions must be reduced, does not however contest the measures proposed by the law, because "disproportionately, expensive and difficult to apply". The organisation, which supports the referendum against this revision, proposes, inter alia, "more tax incentives and an increase in subsidies" and "a revision of the rules of the lease law in order to encourage owners to carry out energy remediation work". What about the Asloca? The Swiss Tenant Association believes that the revision "has little financial effect on tenants". For her, the change in fossil heating systems would only entail an extra rent cost of "less than 20 francs" per month and per household. And an increase in the CO2 tax would only lead to a slight increase, and again for some tenants only (those who benefit from high incomes and who occupy poorly isolated housing and consume a lot of fossil energy). That's why she doesn't give a voting board. L-Asloca ironically points out that the circles that launched the referendum against the CO2 law are also the authors of proposals aimed at, among other things, higher returns for donors and a limitation of tenant rights. "It is hypocritical that the circles that frontally attack tenants' rights are now fighting their interests," she says. What additional costs for Swiss households in the end? The OFEV has been assigned to a calculation. As an example, he took a family of four people living in 128 square metres of accommodation, heating themselves with fuel oil (8 litres per square metre of living space), travelling with a gasoline car consuming 6.08 litres per 100 kilometres with which he travels 120.00500 kilometres per year, and flying annually in Europe. In this case, the total net additional cost (including all taxes and redistribution) could reach 97 francs per year by the end of the decade. Some opponents also take as an example a family of four people, but (according to our information) rely on other figures (larger housing area, larger fuel consumption for housing and automobiles, larger distances travelled, and maximum amounts of taxes defined in the law). They thus come to a much higher cost: 1000 francs per year. Swisscleantech (economic association working for climate protection) commissioned a study in 2019 by Infras (a study and advisory office committed to sustainable development). It is based on four examples of households: one to four people, living space between 50 and 230 square metres, income between 65-160-000 francs per year, and varying levels of fossil energy consumption for housing heating and transport. According to its results, the maximum annual net burden (including all taxes and redistribution) for households varies in 2021 between 60 francs for low-income households with high fossil energy consumption, and 1000 francs for households with high fossil energy consumption, but with high incomes. This burden will increase sharply in 2030 if, by then, these households continue to consume a lot of fossil fuels: between 270 and 400 fr/year for modest households and between 840 and 2300 fr/year for wealthy households. Conversely, in 2021 all types of households with low energy consumption received more money through redistribution than they paid taxes, and they would receive even more in 2030. The revision of the Act provides, inter alia, for the Federal Council to increase the current tax on fossil fuels (mazout, natural gas and coal) used for the heating of buildings. GETTY IMAGES Anti-CO2 battery In addition to the measures on CO2 tax and greenhouse gas emissions from buildings (see opposite), the revision of the CO2 law provides for the introduction of a tax on air tickets ranging from 30 to 120 francs per passenger, and a tax on business flights and private flights from 500 to 3000 francs per flight (according to different criteria). Half of the proceeds of this tax will be paid to the population and the economy, and the rest will be paid to the Climate Fund (a novelty). The obligation for importers of petrol and diesel to offset a larger share of CO2 emissions from these fuels through climate protection measures is also foreseen. In addition, the revision aims to reduce the CO2 target (i.e. the amount of CO2 emitted) for new cars and trucks by 15% from 2025 onwards, and by 30 to 37.5% by 2030 (depending on the type of vehicles). F.B.