Opinions - Courier L的invite A collective punishment that would weigh very heavily Céline Amaudruz National Advisor UDC A week ago, we learned that the Swiss airline was carrying out a wave of massive layoffs, selling a number of aircraft in the wake. This adaptation to the post-Covid market affects our airport and therefore international Geneva. The political world is moving and calling for the Council of State to ensure that airport activity is maintained. The same world is simultaneously campaigning for the CO2 law, including a tax on airline tickets, to discourage the use of this mode of transport by the population. This would require fewer passengers but as many aircraft. Maybe the solution would be to have the planes flown empty. This case demonstrates how heavy the CO2 law will be. Even his strongest supporters fear the fallout. Under the cover of ecology, it is a firm will to harm our economy that animates tax enthusiasts to everything. And to satisfy their demands, we will all move on to the caisse contrary to what federal councillor Sommaruga claims. In an interview, the interested party stated that the CO2 law would only strike those who "do not in fact have any consideration for the climate". A personality believes that opponents of the law are only "self-serving who sell oil and dirty cars". "No consideration for the climate, selfish", bigrate! But who are these exhaust addicts? Well, they're just lambda citizens to whom their incomes do not allow them to become the virtuous beings the Greens dream of. They are tenants and do not have the means to reside in modern apartments at the top in terms of insulation. They are artisans and imagine miscarriage of their equipment in the tram. They are farmers using machines that an electric tractor is not able to operate. They are parents and want to offer their children a holiday in the sun. They're everyone, they're you maybe, reading these lines in your favorite daily. To pass this new attack on our wallets, the politicians have found a solution, redistribution. Yes, the confiscated amounts will be returned in the form of grants. The calculations were made by Confederation, which is solid. As was the temporary motorway decal at 30 fr., the time to complete the network. Today, the network is still waiting while the thumbnail has become permanent at 40 fr., the amount remaining provisional pending an increase. In practice, the CO2 law is only a collective punishment imposed by a few Green idealists who can afford to move only by bicycle. We will all pay the price by reducing our purchasing power. The modest circles will of course be the first victims, punished for not having the means to meet the peremptory aspirations of some. Like Coluche would have said, with the CO2 law, the less you can pay, the more you pay. And all this for a non-measurable effect because of the lack of an instrument capable of understanding the infinitely small.