Readers' mail Middle class at the caisse Geneva, May 11 It seems that the CO2 law was drafted by the Greens as much as it wants to get the population to the caisse! Indeed, everything is planned to empty our wallet. Gasoline price increase: 12 cents per litre. But who can afford it? Under no circumstances are the middle class or the most modest. Air travel for families and young people is also completed: a tax of 120 francs can be levied on each ticket. This is unacceptable for families with relatives abroad who have to go there several times a year. Restricting mobility by making it inaccessible is the worst way to encourage people to reduce pollution. It will therefore be people who do not live in a city centre that will be penalized when they have the least access to quality and sufficient public transport. The increase in fuel taxes will be a blow to the budget of these households. It will be particularly discriminatory against people living in peripheral and mountain areas. SMEs who need a fleet of vehicles (transport, cleaning, home delivery, agriculture) will be at a considerable disadvantage. That's unacceptable. The impact of these measures on the climate will be almost zero. I will vote no to this bill. René Desbaillets, president of the ACS, Geneva section An opportunity not to miss Geneva, 17 May It is true that the Cité de la musique is a "gold opportunity" (TdG of 30.4), it must be seized, above all, it must be repeated, it will not cost the taxpayer a cent, because financed by private funds. Let us therefore be visionary for our city and future generations by voting yes on June 13th! This magnificent project respects the environment and nature, and will highly value our Geneva musical life, all categories combined. That the opponent of this project (TdG of 8 May) defends his point of view is understandable, except that his arguments do not have any vision of the future, nor any valid cultural vision. Fortunately, our builders of past centuries were more adventurous, why not do as they did? Ursula Hotz Pachoud