A proclimate activist again in the court Justice After challenging two fines for unauthorised demonstration, Olivier de Marcellus appeared before a judge yesterday. "The struggle continues," said Olivier de Marcellus in front of the courthouse on Thursday afternoon. The proclimate activist appeared before the Police Court after challenging two violations imposed by criminal orders. But before going to the judge, he wanted to speak to some 30 activists who had come to support him. He had brought the leaflets himself. "I came for Olivier because I find these accusations ridiculous," explains Martine. The seven-year-old is accused of having twice violated the Public Domain Protests Act (LMDPu) by organizing unauthorised rallies. "Christmas Ballad" The facts date back to 2018. In December, the Break Free collective, including Olivier de Marcellus, organized a "Christmas Ballad" in Rues-Basses to denounce the positions of the PLR and the UDC on the CO2 law. "We were about fifteen, some dressed as Santa Claus, walking on the sidewalks, singing and distributing leaflets," said the activist, on the stand. He assured him: the small group had no banner, no megaphone and did not make any obstructions to the movement. A policeman crosses the group and the sum of dispersal, but the militants, thinking in their rights, continue their journey. It is only after the action, when Olivier de Marcellus, then alone, returns with the signs under his arm, that the police question the street of Coutance. One hundred kilos of coal L'another case concerns slightly earlier facts. Also with the Break Free collective, Olivier de Marcellus is accused of having, without prior permission, organized a demonstration to pour 100 kilos of coal in front of the German consulate on September 19, 2018. The action was aimed at supporting the Zadists of the Hambach Forest in western Germany, threatened by the extension of a coal mine of the RWE company. As with the first charge, the activist denies having been an instigator of the action. And when asked why the activists left without cleaning up, despite the demands of the police: "We are accused of not cleaning our little pile, but does RWE remove his big shit after polluting the planet?" Smile in the room. In a lengthy argument, Laila Batou, the defendant's lawyer, discusses the right to demonstrate and the state of necessity, already invoked in other trials related to proclimate demonstrations. It also recalls that, at its adoption in 2008, the Public Domain Demonstrations Act (LMDPu) was intended to address "large-scale demonstrations to avoid spillovers and not to burden climate activists disguised as Santa Claus". According to her, this action was comparable to a school leaving or a bachelor's funeral, and in this case it should also be announced to the authorities. The lawyer will conclude by recalling that her client has been a fervent environmental activist for many years. "Olivier de Marcellus will be among the people who have contributed to global awareness of global warming. And it is not these people that must be amended or sent to prison for five days." The judgment will be rendered later. Lea Frischknecht