Economic circles defend the law on CO2 EconomySwitzerland campaigned for the yes. Sectors such as chemistry and construction see opportunities. Olivier Wurlod "The economy is ready to move forward in climate policy," said Monika Rühl, director of the Swiss Economy, on Monday morning. The umbrella has chosen to support the revision of the CO2 law, even if, in its view, its wording does not fully meet the expectations of the economic world. "A refusal would involve a return of several years and the loss of valuable time," she warned. According to the national advisor Jacqueline de Quattro (PLR/VD), a member of the committee of the umbrella of companies active in renewable energy and energy efficiency (EEA), the Vaud experience has shown that an envelope of 52 million francs at the disposal of the owners has enabled to generate "investments of at least 260 million francs. This is an initiative that has been very successful." It works but time is running out in the light of the latest data provided by the Federal Office for the Environment (OFEV). In 2019, Switzerland emitted 46.2 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent. If these emissions were declining, they were only 14% lower than in 1990. On this basis, OFEV estimates that last year Switzerland was unable to meet its overall reduction target under the CO2 law, i.e. a 20% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions compared to 1990. And it is without taking into account the emissions produced abroad, which account for two thirds of the Swiss footprint. Flexibility that seduces Most of the country's economic sectors seem ready to follow the position taken by Swiss Economy. "The construction sector supports the revision of this law. Constructionsuisse, the national umbrella association of construction, decided in January to recommend the yes," says Christoph Schär, director of Switzerlandtec. This relative unanimity in the economic circles is partly the result of the flexibility allowed by the CO2 guidelines. Christoph Schär believes that they offer "good planning security and maximum flexibility for their implementation". It is also widely felt to be a source of jobs and new business sources for the national economy. "In 2019, the Swiss Heat Initiative Economic Alliance indicated in an in-depth study that a total decarbonisation of the heating and cooling sector would generate at least CHF 1.5 billion in additional value creation in Switzerland," explains Schär. In terms of innovation, the revision of the law could also lead to positive developments. "With the complete electrification of our production, we had to reinvent our processes and technologies," says Matthias Halusa, CEO of BASF chemical group. Federal Votes 13 June 2021 Three Sectors Under the Finance Magnifier In recent months, an increasing number of financial actors have committed themselves to no longer investing in fossil fuels and other particularly polluting activities. "We have decided to eliminate from our balance sheet any exposure to companies engaged in activities related to the production and extraction of fossil fuels," said the Pictet Group. On Monday, the boss of the Swiss Bankers Association (SBA), Jörg Gasser, ensured the involvement of the banking sector in the ecological transition through targeted financing. Credit Suisse, which has declared itself neutral in terms of direct CO2 emissions since 2010 – which does not include the results of investments and investments – continues its strategy of reducing its annual net global greenhouse gas emissions by around 23% since 2017. On the insurance side, the line is similar. "Our goal is to achieve zero net emissions in our business processes by 2030," says Guido Fürer, member of the Swiss Re Executive Committee. And by 2050, we also want to implement this target for our investment and insurance portfolios."Food The main players in the agri-food sector are developing their timetable for achieving carbon neutrality. Two deadlines are clear. The first falls towards the end of the current decade, with reduction targets of about 50% on average. "We are committed to halving our greenhouse gas emissions by 2030," says Nestlé. On the side of the Emmi dairy group, management is committed to reducing direct CO2 emissions by 60% by 2027. However, given its B- rating by the CDP non-profit association (against A- for the multinational veveysanne), the Lucernos giant seems to have some delay to catch up with. Next comes the second deadline: total carbon neutrality. Following the Paris Agreement's objectives, it fell in 2050. In addition to the issue of packaging waste, the other main challenge relates to raw material. "The 90% of our carbon footprint is at the level of milk production," says Emmi. Nestlé claims to be acting "in conjunction with farmers to help them make a transition to more environmentally friendly production methods". Industry Both in light and heavy industry, there seems to be significant progress in terms of the carbon footprint. Take the members of Swissmem, the best representatives of the heavy industry. According to the association defending their interests, they would have reduced their CO2 emissions by 60% compared to 1990. "Compared at the international level, industrial production in Switzerland emits only a small amount of emissions," she says, adding that "80 per cent of the greenhouse gas emissions from the Swiss MEM industry (machines, electrical equipment and metals) come from foreign subcontracting chains". The so-called light industry also claims to make efforts, starting with the two great perfumers Givaudan and Firmenich. The second dares even declare that he wants to achieve carbon neutrality for his operations as early as 2025. The group also says it wants to be positive by 2030, while recycling or reusing all its plastic waste. "It's not just an envelope that is given from time to time, but a real sustainable strategy," said AWP Bérangère Magarinos-Ruchat, Director of Sustainability in Firmenich.