Here are the four faces of the "no" to the CO2 law The project to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is attacked on its right and a little on its left. The point on the forces involved. Florent Quiquerez Bern The revision of the CO2 law will play its future on 13 June. The text, which was produced three years ago, introduced a series of measures aimed at halving greenhouse gas emissions by 2030, with a target of carbon neutrality by 2050. At the same time, it provides for the creation of a climate fund and a tax on airline tickets. But it is not unanimous on the right or on the left. On Tuesday in Bern, an Economic Committee launched its campaign against this text, which was considered costly, ineffective and anti-social. It was these circles that managed to collect 117 − 000 signatures, twice as much as needed. But the referendum was also launched by left-wing circles, which collected 7,000 initials. The Climate Strike and some alternative left parties denounce a law that does not go far enough. Federal votes 13 June 2021 The Employers' Centre If Economy Switzerland supports the law and the Swiss Union of Arts and Crafts (USAM) leaves the freedom to vote, other umbrellas – such as the oil lobby – are scrapping against the text. As for the romand, the fiercest opponents are on the side of the Employers' Centre. "This law is missed," says Patrick Eperon. I am surprised that our authorities dare to introduce it. Its cost-benefit ratio is disastrous. While SMEs are suffering from the crisis, they will be overcharged with taxes on fuel oil or fuels. To get what? A global reduction of half a million greenhouse gases by 2030. The impact on the climate, we will not see; on the other hand, we will see the impact on the purse." "And it takes a lot of nerve to say that the majority of the population will win with this law: it is from the economy "to the Madoff". Of course people will have to pay, and expensive, because this project is antisocial. Finally, I have just seen the enforcement order. If it takes 170 pages to explain how this project works, then we are actually facing a gas factory." Patrick Eperon, communications delegate and political campaigns at the Employers' Centre. SENARCLENS LUSC LAURENT Under the Coupole, the law was supported by all parties, except the UDC, which considered it too radical. The party is on the front line in the opposition camp. "With this project, we shoot ourselves in the foot," said Pierre-André Page (UDC/FR). By imposing new taxes on companies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, they will become vulnerable to foreign competition. And since CO2 does not stop at borders, these negative effects on our economy will not even benefit the climate. This law is also discriminatory. Those who have the means will not really feel the cost increases, whether in terms of heating or mobility.""There is also a risk of a divide between cities and rural areas. It is easy for urban dwellers to travel by public transport to reduce their carbon footprint. On the other hand, the population of the countryside that needs one or two cars to move will be hit hard by the increase in fuel prices." Pierre-André Page, National Advisor (UDC/FR). KEYSTONE Young PLR Several sections of the Young PLR have also committed themselves against the text, notably those of Geneva, Jura and Fribourg, thus challenging the Swiss PLR, the artisan of the compromise. "This law is deeply unfair," says Thomas Juch, coordinator of the Young PLR campaign against the text. Take the tax on plane tickets. To avoid this, you will only have to fly to Lyon or stop in Paris. The text also provides for a whole range of exceptions to avoid having to pay, if one thinks of agriculture or some large companies. Finally, it will be the small people who do not have these privileges who will pay for the reform." "In addition, if we decide to create incentives taxes, then they should be fully returned to the population. And not to feed a climate fund, which we don't know exactly who it will benefit from." In a press release, the Young Swiss PLR also highlight violations of freedom. "An attempt is being made to impose new behaviours on the population through prohibitions and paternalistic demands." Thomas Juch, member of the PLR Youth Committee. DORIS FANCONI/CHERES-ANZEIGER The Climate Strike The law is also attacked by certain climate strikers, notably by the Romande sections. And for those left-wing opponents, it's no wonder. "This law is a continuation of current policies that miss each year their goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions," says Franziska Meinherz, from the Vaud Climate Strike. But the urgency is to achieve carbon neutrality in 2030 already." "The other flaw of this text is not to respect climate justice. Part of the emission rights will be auctioned, which will allow the rich companies to purchase the right to pollute. There are no constraints for large issuers such as finance to simply report. With regard to traffic, responsible for one third of our emissions, the law continues to rely on individual transport. It's a mistake. If petrol cars are simply replaced by electric vehicles, electricity will have to be imported, especially dirty energies from Germany." Franziska Meinherz, member of SolidarityS and the Vaud Climate Strike. VANESSA CARDOSO