"The CO2 law is promising for our economy" The PLR electorate could torpedo the project supposed to embody the green turn of the party. President Petra Gössi takes on her choices. Florent Quiquerez Bern Was the green turn of the PLR a strategic mistake? Not at all. If it were to be done again, I'd do the same thing again. As a reminder, in the programmes of the Radical Party of the 1970s, we already presented our solutions to the environment. The climate is a major challenge for Switzerland and the world, and will remain so. This is our responsibility as a party to deal with it. Today, the CO2 law is an acceptable compromise. The mistake would have been to reject this project. The majority of your voters are not following you. Are you disconnected? With 22 of the 28 sections of the PLR that said yes to this text, we cannot say that we are disconnected from the database. But in front of us, the opponents are very noisy. It is easier to focus a campaign on fear than to explain the complexity of a text. Our members do not like state interventions, but sometimes they are necessary. In the environmental field, the principle of individual responsibility must be supplemented with guidelines. Without these, there would be no treatment of wastewater or the introduction of particulate filters. We have succeeded in incorporating liberal aspects into this law. That's what we need to explain. How is a tax-rich law liberal? Because she doesn't prohibit anything, but gives directions. Incentive taxes put people on the right track without forcing them to do so. If they don't want to adopt new behaviors, then they'll have to pay. But the money will come back from one side directly to the people, and from another part to a fund for innovation. Your electorate is allergic to taxes. Was that the right model? The liberal spirit is inherently opposed to taxes. But what is the alternative? A catalogue of prohibitions as demanded by the Greens and Socialists? Or the ban on new combustion cars by 2025, as the Liberal Green Party supports? With the CO2 law, the people who generate the most CO2 emissions will have to go to the cash register and the others will have more money in the purse. This is the polluter pays principle. But if we don't do anything now, the bill will be heavier in the future, because the fight against the effects of global warming is very expensive. How can this mistrust be explained? Coronavirus is playing against us. I feel a lot of anger from people who have been deprived of freedoms. For them, this law is seen as a new state interference. The other problem is the sling against antipesticidal initiatives. There is an amalgam, which pushes a certain electorate to vote three times no. This is a pity, because the CO2 law is essential for agriculture, which suffers from global warming. Finally, what makes matters more difficult is that the project is carried by Simonetta Sommaruga. Our opponents are trying to make it a left-wing text. The dynamics would have been different if Doris Leuthard had been in command. Your internal poll showed that the PLR electorate was ready for this green turn. Is he schizophrenic or selfish? Neither. It is sensitive to environmental protection. But our members feel that they are already doing a lot for the climate, and do not want the state to force them to do even more. It is true that many citizens or entrepreneurs are engaged, but there are others who do not. And for these, the incentive taxes are perfect. This beautiful speech is not resisting when we talk about an increase in gasoline of 12 cents. From November to April, the price of gasoline varied by 24 cents. Who noticed it? Today, between regions, there are already price differences, but people continue to roll. This increase in the price of gasoline will require the importers to decide whether to impose it and the price will only increase if the targets are not met. I do not deny that this law will have an impact on household income, but we must not think in the short term. This law allows for innovations, creates opportunities. It's promising for the economy. However, the Employers' Centre is against it. I find it difficult to understand this position. The future belongs to companies that rely on the technologies of the future. Of course, this is a challenge for SMEs already affected by coronavirus, but this shift is inevitable. Moreover, many economic sectors have encouraged us to engage in this law. And if this text were so bad, I don't think the USAM would leave the freedom to vote. Above all, I believe that it is the road and oil sectors that do not want it and that put a lot of money to say it. You only have ten days to convince. How are you going to do that? We have planned an action with all party presidents who support the law. We will also write to the young people. We will again send a call to all our members to explain the benefits of the law in their respective circles. This project is almost your baby. Would a failure of the law be that of the PLR? It would be pretentious to say that he's our baby. This is primarily a Confederation project. We have worked for this compromise with the Centre, the Liberal Greens, the Socialist Party or the Greens. The overwhelming majority of the parliament is in favour, the Federal Council too, as well as associations such as the TCS, the Swiss Peasants' Union, Swissbanking, Swissmem, the Swiss Alpine Club, about 200 companies... What we have to say to the population is that with a no on 13 June, there would be no more CO2 law and nothing to protect the climate. We could not fulfil our commitments under the Paris Agreement. This would undermine Switzerland's credibility. Federal votes 13 June 2021 Tamedia poll on CO2 law Petra Gössi calls on PLR voters not to be mistaken in battle on 13 June. KEYSTONE Survey The suspense is still to be put Of the five objects submitted to the vote on June 13, it is indeed the CO2 law that might occupy the end of the campaign. According to the third and last Tamedia poll (editor of this content), the text supposed to allow Switzerland to comply with the Paris Climate Agreements is the only one that can still switch on one side or the other. If, between the first and the second surveys, support had fallen to just 50% of the favourable intentions, compared with 46% of the negative views, the yes side had three points (53%) and the no remained stable. The undecided therefore seem to be leaning for the text. In any case, for a law which was widely supported by the economic circles and by all parties, except UDC, nothing was to be expected of such suspense. Hesitations to the PLR Clearly aware of the uncertain outcome, the close-to-left, Green and Green-liberal polled have tightened the ranks to the maximum, gratifying still some percentages of favourable opinions. Within the electorate of the Agrarian party, on the other hand, the yes capped at 13%. At the PLR, the base has obviously not yet turned green, even if there is a slight change in trend. Indeed, while 58% of the supporters rejected the CO2 law – unlike the party's bodies campaigning for the text – they were still 61% two weeks ago. Fracture city-country While it already announces deep on the so-called antipesticid voting, the city-country divide is also widening on the CO2 law. Unsurprisingly, the urban electorate supports the text most massively with 65% positive intentions (61% two weeks ago). The trend is inverse in the countryside, where the bill of the law will be the saltiest one according to the opponents, and the non wins with 54%. Agglomerations are in the national average. Young people change their minds Another lesson from this third survey, the big surprise of our second survey is disappearing. The 18-34, who still rejected the law 15 days ago, now support it with a hair (50% of yes) but remain the most sceptical, membership increasing with age. Finally, without surprise, the arguments put forward reveal the tone of a campaign that focused solely on the question of taxes. Julien Wicky