Opinions - Courier Guest Let's do our duty in favor of climate Christian Pauletto Member of the PDC Presidency In November 1990 the second World Climate Conference was held in Geneva. This was where the international community agreed to negotiate a climate convention. A negotiating committee of 140 countries was established. After five intense rounds of negotiations, two of which were held in Geneva, the Convention was signed by Federal Councillor Cotti in June 1992 at the Rio Summit. History will retain the key role that our City played in launching this unprecedented, even revolutionary, treaty for the time, which so well reflects the spirit of Geneva: reconciling the divergent interests of the North and the South to tackle a common problem of all humanity and which can only be solved with the assistance of all. Geneva has the privilege of being the host city of the Climate Convention Secretariat, and in general it can pride itself on becoming the world's environmental capital. On the eve of a popular vote on a major stage in Swiss climate policy, it is useful to return to history. For throughout this process, and after the entry into force of the Convention, Switzerland has ceased to stress the importance of climate issues, the need to set very ambitious targets, although not legally binding, and also to use taxes to achieve these objectives. It has done so in meetings in Geneva and around the world, under the auspices of the United Nations, OECD or other organizations. It is true that the tax subject to the next popular vote will be felt at the level of the purse, and that it will harm various sectors of the economy such as airport, industry, construction or international trade. Like any compromise, this law is not perfect. But it has the merit of existence and of having been able to politically unite all the sensitivities. Above all, the problem of climate change is in itself a consensus. And at the time of the vote, beyond the cost, we will also have to consider the benefits of these new measures for the environment and for our children. We have been able to create an unparalleled well-being society in the history of humanity through decades of growth, but now is the time to make bold and visionary decisions. We have to take this turn. A turning point needed precisely to maintain this well-being, because continuing on the current trajectory will not bring us much further. Switzerland cannot remain credible in international conferences if after having argued so much at the United Nations for ambitious climate goals and having encouraged the community of States to move towards a taxation of greenhouse substances we stop at the most critical moment of translating words into reality at the national level. For if the people say no to this law, it means that for several years nothing will evolve in this field in Switzerland. Being the host country and city of international negotiations on these issues also implies a degree of responsibility and coherence in our national and international policies.