Young people push the law that is supposed to protect the climate According to Tamedia's second poll, support for the CO2 law sseffrite. And those under 35 would be the most skeptical. Federal votes 13 June 2021 Julien Wicky C的was in another life, in 2019, before the Covid. The youth took the street, walked for the climate and embodied the Green Wave of the federal elections. Two years later, however, 18-34-year-olds would be the least likely to support the CO2 law, which was supposed to allow Switzerland to comply with the Paris Agreements. This is what the second Tamedia poll (publisher of this newspaper) published this Wednesday reveals. 51% of respondents in this category would refuse the text and 45% would support it. As age groups rise, the proportion is inverse to 57% of favourable intentions among 65 and over. This figure should be relativized, since the first SSR survey, which was unveiled by the GfS.bern Institute on 7 May, reported approval of 62% among 18-39 year-olds, but still below the senior (65% yes). On the other hand, weaker support from young people was already evident in our first survey and it has since collapsed by 7 points. Above all, this second Tamedia survey reveals that the yes to the CO2 law loses 4 points to reach just 50%. With 4% of the vote undecided, the suspense therefore remained at a little more than three weeks from the vote. Lack of Mobilization Could the youth vote be the law? For the Swiss Young Greens Co-President, Oleg Gafner, this result is not so surprising. "In this age group there are people who already have a life course, who know their expenses and who calculate the effect of the taxes provided for in the law. And in the current economic context, this fear can explain this trend," he analyses. Nothing is lost, according to him. "The campaign is still timid and, above all, it is very classic and does not talk much to young people. There is still a lack of mobilization," he stresses. As a reminder, the law provides for increased taxes on petrol, fuel oil and airline tickets. The text is widely supported in the environmental camp, but the Young Greens are not a vile critic. "Many people would have liked a text that actually goes further and proposes a real paradigm shift. However, voting no would waste valuable time," adds Oleg Gafner. He assures that he will slip a yes into the urn. It is recalled that sections of the climate strikers had supported the referendum to sanction this law deemed too soft. But this argument does not seem to be the one that explains the disaffection of the younger ones. It is only mentioned in 1% of the cases of opponents. Far behind criticism of financial motives. Among those who believe that "the climate problem is not solved with taxes and taxes but with innovation", those who consider that a "family of four will have an extra 1000 francs of taxes" and others who claim that "these instruments harm the economy", 72% of the unfavourable opinions are cumulated. Taxes hide everything So everything would be just a matter of money, and it would be all the more important for the younger generation's wallets. An effect accentuated by the pandemic and the lack of prospects it causes. And, more simply, some people want to travel without going into debt. As for the fact that these taxes are redistributed to the population by a reduction in health insurance premiums or through a climate fund, the respondents remain deaf. "For a young person, seeing the price of his plane ticket to Barcelona increase after a year without travelling is much more palpable than the idea of a climate fund," says Nicolas Jutzet, Vice-President of the Young Swiss Liberals-Radicaux, who left the freedom to vote. This difficult aspect is shared by the Young Greens. They are also relying on what has built their success with a strike "for the future" scheduled this Friday. Results of the Tamedia poll for the vote on the CO2 law "For a young person, seeing the price of his plane ticket to Barcelona increase after a year without having travelled is much more palpable than the idea of a climate fund." Nicolas Jutzet Vice-President of the Young Swiss Liberals-Radicaux