CO2 law: a challenge as much as an opportunity Pierre Jacquot President of SVIT Romandie The revised CO2 law, which will be submitted to the popular vote on 13 June, contains many provisions that directly concern the real estate sector. No more CO2 emissions from fossil fuels for new constructions, a limit on emissions when replacing heating systems, an increase in the CO2 tax in case of exceedance... all of these drastic measures will represent considerable financial and logistical challenges for owners, especially since the period of implementation would be relatively short. While the fight against climate change has long been a part of the mindsets and has gained almost total support, such strict standards still have cause for anxiety among the actors concerned. This revision of the law, however, addresses a real and undeniable problem. The increase in temperature due to climate change is twice as fast in Switzerland as the global average. A renovation rate of approximately 2 to 3% of the housing stock would be necessary to halt and meet the commitments made under the Paris agreements. Currently, Switzerland has an average ceiling of 1%. Geneva is still lagging further behind. The opposite infographic gives an overview of the extent of the phenomenon: the overwhelming majority of residential buildings built before 1990 in the canton of Geneva, for the time being, have never been renovated. When it is known that buildings account for 27% of CO2 emissions in the country, it is understood that it is urgent to do better, faster and on a larger scale. The revision of the CO2 law would contribute to a strong acceleration of the trend. Let us not be mistaken, this law would have the effect of a small revolution on current practices in the real estate industry. For example, the Federal Energy Board anticipates the deployment of 1.5 million electric heat pumps in the country, which currently accounts for 350 million. Moreover, the acceleration of the renovations generated by the adoption of the law would not be linear: we would have to learn how to manage and put into practice successive waves of work. The renovation market would eventually rise to 50 billion francs per year, compared with 16 billion at present. A range of aid can be mobilised to meet these challenges. A dedicated fund would reduce the overall financial burden by 450 million francs. An increase in building rights is also announced in the case of new buildings or energy-exemplary renovations, and derogation models are provided for remote heating connections. Finally, the gains generated by renovations can be passed on to rents where the market permits. At the same time, tenants will benefit from lower charges, thanks to new energy-efficient facilities. A study conducted by Swiss Property Management Lab shows that sustainability issues are prominent in the prospects of real estate professionals. Most of them consider environmental issues to be unavoidable. The authorities and the owners are therefore aware of the changes to come and are preparing for them as best they can. All these signs show that it is now time to make a reality. The revision of the CO2 law may well represent a win-win situation. On the one hand, it represents a major step in the fight against global warming. On the other hand, it is a manna for our sector, which would create wealth and jobs in the local economy. Finally, the valorisation of real estate assets and the improvement of comfort for the Swiss population are concrete benefits that would result from validation in the ballot box. SVIT Romandie is aware that the investments generated by this law will be a challenge for building owners, particularly in areas where excess supply limits manoeuvre margin and rent increases. We are also critical of the period of implementation, which is particularly rapid for a sector dominated by very long investment cycles. However, given the climate and urgency of the situation, we strongly recommend acceptance of this law and call on the sector to mobilize to meet the challenge. www.svit.ch/en/svit-romandie Percentage of unrenovated residential buildings built prior to 1990 "Investments generated by this Act will be a challenge for building owners."