Readers' Mail A parody of Clochemerle Geneva, 31 May A big thank you to your column of today which clearly, simply and convincingly sets out, including on the difficult problem of wage protection, the dramatic historical error of the brutal and unilateral break-up of negotiations with Brussels on the framework agreement between Switzerland and Europe. This catastrophic decision is at the height of the imperiety that reigns at the top of the federal executive! Negotiating, talking, exchanging is always proof of intelligence. Even if it takes years. Even if you have to let go of the ballast. To slam the door, in a discussion, however difficult it may be, is only a sign of capricious nonsense. What remains of Switzerland's image after this pitiful performance of a Federal Council that is tetanized by the domination of a political party that has only xenophobia as an intellectual horizon and the shadow of its bell tower as a planetary vision? A ridiculous parody of Clochemerle in which, with an arrogance of rural guard engulfing the "Y-a-no like us", we pretend to radiate on the world like collets on their bassyard... What a pity (in the sense of damage)! And what a shame! Bernard Zumthor Law on CO2, artistic blur Meyrin, May 25 The law that is proposed to us is very clear on taxes and constraints, and very vague about what the citizen will receive in return. Here is an illustration of this in the field of building heating. Take the case of pensioners living in their 150 m2 oil-fired villa at 3000 litres per year. The new law limits 20 kg of CO2 per m2 heated to 3000 kg of CO2, while the 3000 l of fuel oil produces 9000 kg of CO2. In the short term, they will be forced by the new law to change their installation. How much will it cost to install a heat pump? A minimum of 40,000 francs! It would be the same investment if they were gas! However, the CO2 law does not provide any guarantee as to the subsidies that can be expected. If the subsidies remain the same, the pensioners of the example will receive 6000 frs (15%), which will reduce the final bill to about 34,000 Frs. Even if it is true that their future spending will decrease, do they have that money? If action is needed to reduce the CO2 impact of buildings, then put in place real incentives (e.g. the removal of real estate tax for owners who meet CO2 standards), or larger and clear subsidies, rather than this stick policy that strikes people who have worked their entire lives to stay in their homes. Eric Vulliez