Three small yess are emerging in the ballot box for green objects The CO2 law and the two pesticide initiatives are leaving in a small advance, according to the results of our first survey. Federal votes 13 June 2021 Lucie Monnat Despite the pro-climate protests and a green wave that regularly rushes into the polls, the CO2 law receives a chilly support. According to the first poll conducted by Tamedia (publisher of this content) before the votes of 13 June, the law under attack in referendum won 54% support for the hour, compared with 43% of no and 3% of undecided. Nothing is played: often, support for an object declines during the campaign. "This shows that the oil lobby is doing a dangerous campaign," said National Councillor Roger Nordmann (PS/VD), a member of the committee in favour of the yes. We must continue to fight." The new law provides for a series of measures to halve greenhouse gas emissions by 2030, with the goal of carbon neutrality by 2050. At the same time, it provides for the creation of a climate fund and a tax on airline tickets. According to our poll, the no camp regrets that "with this law a family of four will have to pay more than 1000 francs to fly". The vast majority of opponents believe above all that "the problem of global warming will not be solved with taxes and taxes, but with innovation". Roger Nordmann thinks they're on the wrong road. "This law stimulates technical innovation precisely," the national adviser argues. The income from the incentive taxes does not go into the state funds, it is returned to the population, on a flat-rate basis, to preserve the purchasing power." Supported by the PLR and the peasants Waited for, the city-country divide is true: the law meets massive support in the cities (65%), while the yes does not exceed 51% in the cities and 47% in the countryside. The voters in the countryside are therefore in a state of discord with the Swiss Farmers' Union (USP). On 28 April, the Commission declared its support for the law. "Climate change is hitting the agricultural sector hard," his committee argues. Another shift is observed on the side of PLR supporters, who reject the new standard at 59%. "These new taxes and prohibitions are detrimental to the economy," some of the opponents say. "The PLR base has not yet understood that their party is fully committed to the law," notes Roger Nordmann. The Socialist is engaged in the committee alongside the National Councillor Jacqueline de Quattro (PLR/VD), whose party recommends slipping a yes into the urn. "The polluter pays principle is at the heart of the CO2 law," writes the PLR. That pollutes more pays more." For Roger Nordmann, the support of the PLR and USP is a very good sign. "This will clearly help us, as soon as the positionings are clear in the minds." But the other side, led by the UDC, did not say its last word Young people vote no to the pesticide initiatives The two popular initiatives against pesticides also start very softly. The text of "Clean water" is intended to deprive farmers who use pesticides of direct payments. Initiants also require farms without antibiotics used for preventive purposes or imported forage. The proposal is currently supported at 54%. The initiative "For a Swiss free of synthetic pesticides" calls for the elimination of these products in food production, in public spaces and in individuals, with a transition period of 10 years. The text won 53% of the vote, according to our survey. These almost similar results show that supporters and opponents of one of the texts do not stand out from the other. Supports now represent a small majority, but the trend is not very good. Even more than a law submitted to the referendum, initiatives must go very hard to win. There too, unsurprisingly, is an important city-country divide, with support of 68% for "Clean water" among urban dwellers, compared with 45% for rural dwellers (65 and 45% for the second text, respectively). But the survey reveals an amazing profile of the support for both texts. You thought ecology was a youth business? Deceive yourself. Both proposals received significant senior approval, with over 60% yes. Scepticism increases as the average age decreases, until it reaches 51% no, for both objects, in the 18-34 age group. The latter appear to be sensitive to the arguments of the opposition camp, which consider that both proposals threaten security of supply in Switzerland. Many also fear rising food prices. Results of the Tamedia poll for the votes of 13 June 2021 "The proceeds of the incentive taxes do not go into the state caisses, it is returned to the population, flatly, to preserve the purchasing power."