Opinions - Courrier Chronique Climat: strike, cries and weight of mutiques Pierre Ruetschi Journaliste * Certainly, it is only about polls. But the trend is growing: the CO2 law submitted to the people on 13 June is losing ground to the point that the result becomes highly uncertain. However, the target is clear and reasonable: reducing CO2 emissions by 50% by 2030 compared to 1990. A measure that holds Switzerland on the Paris Agreement. Between the first GFS poll in mid-April and the most recent (3rd of the genre) conducted by Tamedia in mid-May and published this week, the advance of the supporters of the law collapsed from 25% (60% of the yes) to 4% (50% of the yes). Thus, a law widely endorsed by a large majority of parties, which is the logical follow-up to a broad awareness of the climate danger, is on the brink. More surprisingly, the latest survey shows that the youth are most reluctant. Of course! The 18-34 year-olds probably consider the CO2 law far too unambitious to their liking following in this the "eco-fundis" who launched a referendum for precisely this reason. Wrong! It is not the softness of the law that irritates (only 1% of opponents consider the argument to be the priority) but the new taxes that first affect small incomes. A whole world of reassuring little certainties collapses. This mass of teenagers that we saw go down the streets of Switzerland by tens of thousands, ingenious in the slogan, ingenious and authentic indignation, convincing in the commitment, is that we realize that their first concern would be taxes. To be nuanced and checked, of course. But still. The disillusionment is painful, starting with the old crabs. One wanted to believe in the idealism of a generation that was said to be poorly engaged, at least in comparison with the breakers that climbed to all the barricades of the 1960s and 1980s. The "old" were ready to follow, not necessarily on the sidewalks of the city, but in the idea and the objectives, while gratifying for their individual comfort amputated by a few hundred francs. If a majority of young people start to reason like the presbyterians, we have a right to worry. So what's the value of these green waves that ran all over the election days? What are these crowds gathered in Plainpalais, Paradeplatz or La Riponne galvanized by the words of Greta Thunberg? Is there enough interest in what young people who were not on the street thought because yes, there is? And the others, have we cared about their invasive desires to just resume a flight at 30 francs to party in the sun? This Friday at 11:59 a.m., the Genevans are invited to come and scream, whistle, sound the climate tocsin. "Make as much noise as possible", the organizers of the Strike for the Future, post-Covid version of the Climate Strike encourage. Yes, the climate is worth its pack of decibels. More than ever, the power of movements is assessed by the sound meter, whether it is noise on the pavement or on social networks. It's a revealing clue. But like polls, not always reliable. He says nothing about this silent mass, sometimes the majority, which ends up expressing itself in the ballot box, in exclusivity. The CO2 law is the best option to move the matter forward, as we say in Bern. But to involve the mutists, it will also be necessary to explain to them better why the new taxes are worth paying. The screams, however strident they may be, will not suffice. * Executive Director of the Swiss Press Club