Opinions - Courier Readers' mail Carouge road network, 20 April I have read carefully the interview of Mr Hodgers in today's "TdG" and I am surprised that this gentleman, blinded by ecological dogmatism, does not seem to live on the same planet as his fellow citizens. Apart from the fact that we cannot blame our French friends for wanting to free the agglomerations of Chablais from a demented traffic, including a part of Swiss trucks, thus escaping the heavy-duty tax of the Geneva-Villeneuve motorway, saying that road investments belong to the past, is to deny the important changes in the current car fleets and heavy-duty vehicles, which will not diminish, do not displease some, but will use clean energies! Electricity, hydrogen, sail or steam, the individual vehicle still has good days ahead, satisfying the increasingly developed need for freedom in our stressed society. As for heavy goods vehicles, the development of Internet purchases increases packages, so the volumes to be transported, and it is not the train that will reverse this situation. We will therefore always need an efficient road network, avoiding as much as possible the agglomerations, allowing thousands of borderers who do not want to live in Switzerland to move easily, in clean vehicles. Yves Bourquin CO2 Act Geneva, April 21, According to the April 20, article entitled "Here are the four faces of the "no" to the CO2 law", the project is considered "costful, ineffective and antisocial". However, Switzerland is very affected by global warming and – according to the Federal Council – it is even warming twice as much as the global average. There are real dangers that emerge from this phenomenon. [...] The new CO2 law is not based on prohibitions, but on incentives. It is a completely liberal law that gives everyone freedom and also rewards climate-friendly behaviour. Providing financial incentives and investing in new technologies is a good way to tackle this scourge. Moreover, these revenues generated by the law are not lost in the depths of the public treasury. Rather, they are the people who in our country behave in a climate-friendly manner. They are also used to support the renovation of buildings or to finance adaptation measures to the consequences of climate change. Finally, part of the revenue goes into research and development and therefore into the innovative sectors of our economy, which can use it to create new jobs. Ecology and economics can therefore complement each other! Joëlle Fiss Alternate Deputy Grand Council (PLR)