The environmental leap that the liberals will love Perspectives The researchers of Avenir Switzerland want a very ambitious climate policy for Switzerland, provided that it is resolutely liberal. Liberal circles have not always been the most active or talkable in terms of ecology, especially on global warming. But, to believe Avenir Suisse, the laboratory of ideas founded by large Swiss companies, this political abandonment is a mistake. Policies of state or leadership, even moralizing, are likely to prevail. Avenir Suisse admits in a book that has been very scientificly researched, dense in information, well argued (liberal theory), which has just been published*. And he explains in a passage that calls his supporters, liberal minds, those who defend the principles of the market economy, to a real political shock. "The Liberals would do their own and world a favor if they treated climate change with the same seriousness as the left does." Their difference with the left and the Greens? The means to be used to protect "a common good", an environment that does not undermine the development prospects of future generations. Future Switzerland considers the truth about externalities (environmental damage not taken into account in price formation) and their integration into the economic system to be effective tools for achieving a zero-carbon society. The state must set targets but not determine the technologies to achieve them; the market (competition) is much more efficient. As for the prohibitions (to impose an absolute embargo on oil in the short term), they are often not convincing and could even have a contrary effect: to make the price of oil cheaper in the lax regions. To make it simple, the royal and... liberal way to stop global warming requires a dissuasive pricing of fossil-based greenhouse gases (CO2 tax). Airfare taxes? A political nonsense (Avenir Suisse uses a more polite term) that robs citizens and whose effectiveness will be derisory. One might think that the future of Switzerland is torpedoing the revision of the CO2 law, in vote on 13 June. Even if the authors prohibit any explicit slogans (a rule valid for all voting subjects), they consider that this revision "improves some instruments and should achieve the 2030 targets". But, in their view, the revision lacks ambition (!) and will have to be reformed very quickly. For the liberal laboratory, Switzerland must not only be exemplary in the effectiveness of the measures but also more ambitious at the international level. Future Switzerland calls for close cooperation with the European Union and believes that it would be wise for virtuous countries to tax the "parasite" states, those who drag their feet at the border. A fund for the future At the domestic level, Avenir Suisse denounces the inefficiency of the cantons' building plan (grants for insulation and new heating systems), the failure of car standards and believes that the new climate fund risks becoming the self-service grant fund for the countless lobbies interested in the share of the revenue from the CO2 tax that will not be redistributed to the population. If one thinks of a fund, Avenir Suisse is putting forward a more innovative solution: to accumulate savings to finance the new technologies that will be needed to remove CO2 from the atmosphere by 2050 and help future generations adapt to the foreseeable effects of climate change. The orphaned liberals in climate policy will love it. Please. * www.future-suisse.ch "The Liberals would do their own and world a favor if they treated climate change with the same seriousness as the left does."