Readers' mail Abandoned ballots Veyrier, 1 June We hear about the polling and election service unfortunately when it is charged with a malfunction. It is a pity, because in reality it is the service of the State that enables the people of Geneva to exercise their primary role, that of their sovereignty, whether it is to express themselves by a communal, cantonal or federal vote, or for elections, decisions, enactment of laws or constitutional articles. Many of the world's inhabitants are becoming this Swiss organization. It remains to guarantee him the perfection of his organization and the security of the voters' writings. It is thus learned by the press that some 7,000 ballot papers were abandoned on a sidewalk for three days and nights. In this case, they were not the liases of banknotes forgotten in front of a bank. On the contrary, what has been deposited is much more valuable than money, it is the very exercise of power in our democratic country. Although La Poste has made this deposit as it does every Saturday before the votes, the responsibility for follow-up lies with the professional conscience of the officials of the Voting Service, which does not have to fall behind its carrier. We therefore look forward to the opening of an investigation by the Attorney General, who, let us not forget, is there to defend today the most important aggrieved of the Republic, its people. Gilles Bourquin June 13th, the voice of the animals Oak-Bourg, May 26th, Moi, c'est Modestine. For a long time I have been a patrac, unable to manage, "careful" because I can't eat alone, I don't know how to take it, as if I had lost the way to use it. In front of my plate – I'm waiting. I'm still small and soft. I have my back legs turned outwards, I can't walk straight, I slowly circle, embarrassing to run after my meal. My legs don't respond to what I ask them and work slow, as if my brain was far away from them and my ankylosed neurons. Listening around me, I learned things that I had hidden – to you too? It all started before I was born. My parents, short on legs, "working in the agricultural environment", eaters of slugs, worms and insects seasoned with glyphosate or other pesticides, have passed on this chemical heritage. Lactated with pesticides, I then chewed slugs, worms and cies, thus finalizing the parental chemical heritage. Pesticides can cause, among other things, neurological and behavioural disorders, stunting, muscle fatigue, a palatine slit, etc. I'm lucky I don't have a palatine slot, but my two sisters died. I've shed big tears, but I keep hope, and it's placed in you. Modestine the hedgehog Suzanne Soder Noise protection Geneva, 22 May In 2018 I wrote to the state asking when a phonobsorbent soil would be laid on the road to Florissant. It was said that this work was important and would be undertaken next year, i.e. in 2019. As can be seen, nothing has been done on this extremely noisy and especially very inhabited road, as well as on Avenue Eugène-Pittard. While we are talking about introducing the speed of 30 km/h in the city, would it not be better to place this very efficient flooring in the very inhabited arteries? Whether the speed is set at 30 or 50 km/h, the noise of starting a car is of the same intensity and the road of Florissant is minced by pedestrian crossings which require the complete stop of the vehicle and therefore the subsequent restart. Marianne Herzog Une Cité de la musique futile Grand-Saconnex, May 18, This project, out of measure, dates back to a past era. It no longer meets today's needs, let alone future needs. Operating rates are far from reality and above all far too optimistic. No cultural institution operates without grants. Today, the OSR is struggling to fill the Victoria Hall with 900 seats. The music lovers, an aging audience, lack of succession. Youth, despite the measures in place, remains the minority. The Covid and his descendants will maintain the restrictions dictated by Bern and change habits and behaviors. The streaming already in place will increase thanks to comfort. The future of teaching is the "Toile" as it already is; lessons in class will be the exception. An important subject, young people who leave the Conservatory no longer find commitment. The number of pupils will decrease and the 95 rooms are an aberration. The post-Covid world is not perceptible, which should encourage caution. [...] The destruction of this magnificent paradise of greenery, rare in the Place des Nations, is deplorable – we love our mother Nature – the slaughter of 126 trees and the atmospheric grip of this concrete mass will be very harmful to an environment already heavily impacted. Where are the climate advocates? Régina Bader Doing her duty as a citizen Geneva, 23 May Democracy exists only if one does his duty as a citizen, i.e. to vote with all benevolence. To vote yes for the CO2 law is to accept its responsibilities, is to take urgent measures to protect the climate. The CO2 law is a step towards a future without oil, natural gas and coal. It is also a step towards the end of the grip of a destructive and decadent elite on our lives. Failure to reduce CO2 emissions worldwide would have devastating consequences for our livelihoods. This is one of the greatest challenges of our time, it is about saving the world. To hell with our achievements, to hell with our so-called economic well-being, to hell with our selfishness, the time has come to really change the future and take over our destiny. We cannot ask ourselves the question in terms of yes or no, it is beyond intelligence and thought. Vote no would be a crime against humanity. To vote no would be the end of humanity. Alex Simha