"This text punishes us and forgets innovation" The Center Patronal fights the CO2 law. Patrick Eperon, his political delegate, considers it too expensive and ineffective. Federal votes 13 June 2021 Julien Wicky M. Eperon, can we fight the CO2 law without denying the problem of global warming? We have nothing climatosceptical and it is to make us a bad trial to suggest this. It's a fact, it's a difficult fight and it's not about denying the problem. What I'm saying is that we're being lied to when it's claimed that this law is effective and cost nothing. It's even the opposite. We are already doing much more than most European countries or the United States. The Germans are taxing the tonne of CO2 to the tune of 25 euros, we are 96 francs and this law will make us climb up to 210. All this to gain, over a year, the equivalent of one day of Chinese CO2 emissions. Switzerland is particularly affected by global warming. As such, but also because it is a rich country, should it not do more? It is a fact, Switzerland is more affected, but this is largely due to our geographical location. This finding is used to suggest that the Swiss would be more guilty than the others. In fact, this is the opposite: a large number of Swiss companies have invested massively and have dramatically reduced their CO2 emissions. I am pragmatic: why not continue with a recipe that works? Perhaps because Switzerland failed to meet the 2020 targets (-14% instead of -20% compared to 1990 emissions). These goals are derived from the Kyoto Protocol, which many countries have left. There is propaganda that suggests that all countries are on the same path, to make us feel guilty. So we're giving up our goals? It may be admitted that such ambitious targets were unrealistic given the fact that the Swiss population has increased by 2 million inhabitants since 1990. We have the opportunity to achieve our goals by continuing with what has worked well and taking advantage of recent technological developments. This requires a public policy that encourages innovation. It is not thanks to the Greens that the automotive industry has managed to reduce the consumption of petrol per vehicle. But this law does not in any way prevent innovation. No, but she's focused on punishment. The word "innovation" appears only three times in this 87-article law, compared to 126 times in the word "tax". This law therefore relies on the money and power it provides. You campaign with the oil industry, to which Switzerland pays CHF 8 billion a year. Is this really still defensible? The Swiss Landowners' Association, such as Gastro-Switzerland, Swiss Trade, Swissmechanic or the Swiss Landowners' Association, are opposed to this law and have little to do with oil dealers. Furthermore, I would like to inform you that the latter's mandate at the Corporate Centre amounts to 12 − 000 francs a year, while our turnover amounts to over 60 million dollars a year. If we fight this law, it's out of conviction. The release of coal and fossil fuels is already under way. By opposing this text, do you swim against the current? The electrification of the economy and society is in progress. It is a reality and we are absolutely not opposed to it. But Swiss electricity production will decline with the release of nuclear power, which will not be compensated by wind turbines, contested everywhere. Gas and petroleum products account for 63% of our energy consumption. And when you just say that you have to get past it, it's nothing but a hollow slogan. By taking climate-friendly measures, SMEs will escape the tax. This exemption benefits only large companies today. What's bothering you? This is one of the few positive points of this law. The problem is to suggest that this exemption is free of charge. To be exempted, we must invest heavily. The Centre Patronal is in the process of completing work to completely remove fossil fuels via a cooling system linked to the lake water, coupled with solar panels. This facility will take forty years to be amortized. Who, apart from large organizations, can afford it? The campaign is turning to the battle of numbers. The advocates say that a family will pay an extra 100 francs in taxes. You say it'll be ten times more. Are you exaggerating? The rates that we keep are those set out in the law. Moreover, whether the law is accepted or rejected, it is only the beginning of a series of laws and measures in the name of climate. And after June 13, promises of fiscal moderation will not engage more than those who have believed in it. But the revenue from the tax goes to the one who acts favorably with regard to the climate or benefits innovation through the climate fund. In essence, is it very liberal as an approach? It would be true if the tax were 100% incentive, but much of it is not because of the climate fund. In addition, not one franc will be returned for the additional 12 cents per litre of gasoline, neither to the population nor to businesses. High energy costs and low cash flow will fund low cost and high cash flow. The baker finances the banker. At the population level, the problem is the same: tenants who cannot choose their heating system or owners who cannot afford to change cars pay for the most affluent. EconomySwitzerland and other economic circles support the text. You're very isolated. I simply note that a year ago they basically shared the position we are defending, so it would be best to ask them why they changed their minds. Less flying, on the other hand, it's pretty easy. Again, citizens are told that business aviation will pay for others. In fact, large companies are replacing trips with visiosessions, and families, especially binationals, will pay the most. As you say yourself, other climate laws will come in particular with the glacier initiative and its counter-project. To reject this law is to push back the problem? If the no wins on 13 June, it will be a very clear brake on the rise of an excessive, purely Swiss, tax for anecdotal results. Times have also changed since the green wave of 2019. We are no longer in a dogmatic logic that is no longer being discussed. We have come back to a logic of debate, with the freedom to say no. If it's because of the pandemic, admit it's pretty ironic. This crisis has highlighted that a whole part of the economy is already at the limit when everything is fine, which was the case in 2019 for the most part. And not much is enough to turn on the wrong side: the pandemic is the indicator. I'm not happy, far from it. But many people have gone on the wrong side and cannot afford new taxes. The Covid crisis reminded us that before the end of the world, there was the end of the month. "The crisis of the Covid reminded us that before the end of the world, there was the end of the month." Patrick Eperon Political Delegate of the Centre Patronal