Geneva mobilization for the CO2 law From left to right, nine parties and associations defend the text passed by vote on 13 June. Marc Bretton "The panel before you demonstrates that there is still a broad consensus in this country." At the end of the bench, Nicolas Rufener, Secretary General of the Federation of Building Trades (FMB), is the last speaker to speak, but his remark could have introduced the press conference. It is not every day that nine parties and associations unite to defend a federal text that aims to tax CO2 emissions in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by half by 2030. According to the supporters of the project, the deadlines are tight: "If nothing is done, the temperature in Switzerland and Europe could rise well beyond the temperatures expected," says the National Councillor Verte Delphine Klopfenstein Broggini. We are the first generation to feel the effects of global warming and probably the last to be able to change something by taking immediate action."The subject will be voted on June 13. A part of the oil industry, the automotive industry, as well as the USAM and the UDC oppose it. "Intelligent Incitations" But in Geneva, the climate emergency seems to be widely accepted. However, everyone has their reasons to support the text. In the neighborhood hall of the whole Minoteries, whose renovation at great cost by the City saves 500,000 litres of oil per year, explains the administrative advisor Alfonso Gomez, some of them highlight what they like in the vast package of measures proposed. To the right, we appreciate the method: "The proposed taxes are not stupid and mean," said PDC National Advisor Vincent Maitre. They are useful for achieving the objectives and will be redistributed to all the players in the Swiss economy, especially to enterprises, in the form of innovation loans that are essential for a reorientation of the economy."Representing the PLR, Alexandre de Senarclens is pleased: "This text introduces the concept of polluter pays, which promotes virtuous behaviour and meets the greatest challenge facing our country in the 21st century."The massive investments planned in the clean-up of buildings that generate almost a third of the country's CO2 emissions are salivating the building community. "A net gain" On the left, among the measures advanced, it is the taxation of CO2 emissions, and in particular of air traffic, that seduces. Part of the money will go back to the population, especially to finance health insurance premiums. "For 90% of the population who fly a little, this law is a net financial gain. It rewards those who travel otherwise," said PS National Advisor Laurence Fehlmann Rielle. Otherwise? By train and why not by night train! Caroline Marti and Andrea von Maltitz assure that they will replace aircraft for short and medium distances. The last argument in favour of the text is health: "Air pollution has important health consequences," says Marie-Claude Sawerschel, president of the Liberal Greens. It costs 6.5 billion a year and causes 15,000 days of hospitalization." It would limit the health of the Genevans. The nine supporters of the CO2 law: for the climate. LUCIEN FORTUNATI The three-point text Purpose: The CO2 law aims to halve the 1990 level and by 2030 the greenhouse gas emissions. Means: the law increases the tax already levied on diesel fuel from 120 to 210 francs per tonne. An increase of 5 to 12 cents per litre of petrol and diesel is added. Airfares will be taxed from 30 francs to 120 francs, plus business and private flights. Energy standards for buildings and pollution of imported vehicles will be tightened. Use: Tax revenues will be redistributed to businesses, to the population through an increase in discounts on sickness premiums, or will provide a climate fund to finance the installation of charging stations for electric vehicles, the acquisition of electric buses or the financing of remote heating networks. As regards buildings, this fund will support energy clean-up. M.BN