The polluter pays principle Today's letter Geneva, 3 June Today we are at a turning point in climate, given the projections of the temperature rise by the end of the century, inaction is simply not acceptable. It is our responsibility now to reverse the trend in order to leave to future generations a planet that remains habitable. For Switzerland, the stake is great because mountain regions warm up faster on average and the consequences are already visible: extreme weather events, melting of glaciers and permafrost, floods and landslides, etc. This principle of solidarity between generations is present in the law, in particular by taking into account the particular situation of families. They will benefit from the above average redistribution of taxes, in particular through the reduction of health insurance premiums. Moreover, they do not take the plane and since they share their living space, they consume proportionally less energy than other people. In fact, more than half of the population will ultimately pay no more, but less, climate taxes, especially those who are economically less well off. It's fair and fair. The CO2 law is based on the polluter pays principle. Large emitters pay more than others. Those who consume little gas and oil receive money in return. The CO2 law does not impose prohibitions and is part of a successful incentive approach. It is a matter of making the cost of CO2 emissions visible to society, a cost that it is normal to reflect in the price of fossil fuels, since in the end we will all pay for it collectively. To preserve our freedom of decision and that of future generations, let us be responsible and supportive by giving us the means to achieve this transition to a decarbonized society together. Switzerland is capable of doing so. With our knowledge and strength of innovation, with the right incentives and the climate fund provided for by law, we will be able to meet the climate challenge! Let us now act by voting yes to the CO2 law on June 13. Jean Marc Guinchard Consultant, Member of Parliament, former President of the Grand Council