Bern disputes a rent increase of 140 francs per month if yes prevails CO2 law Unlike what a landlord association says, rents should not increase. If the CO2 law is accepted on 13 June, the rent for an apartment of 100 m2 will increase by an average of 140 francs. This is what the Swiss Landowners' Association (HEV) claims in a media campaign.According to the Swiss Landowners' Association (HEV), the increase, called "the tenant purse", is due to the "mandatory sanitation" induced by the "unrealistic requirements" of the text. These arguments bring out of his gonds Carlo Sommaruga, president of Asloca. "The announcement claims that the CO2 law will be a looting of tenants' stock exchanges while it is taking place at this time, even before the law comes into force, with a rent level that increases every year, and this by the willingness of the lenders to increase their yields," it pisses him off to the Geneva states. For the socialist elected, it cannot be said that the rents will take the elevator in case of yes. "Sanitations will not be mandatory. They will have to be done if the other measures are not sufficient. And, in this case, we will have to take into account the other factors of rent fixing, including the decreases in mortgage rates, Carlo Sommaruga explains. There may therefore be a decrease, stability or slight increase. Each case will be different but there will be no increase of 140 francs." This figure is based on a study by the Federal Office for Energy (OFEN), says the HEV. However, the same Office, contacted by us on Monday, refutes having reached this conclusion in its 2015 report. "We cannot reconstruct this figure on the basis of the study. So we don't know what the HEV's calculations are," says Marianne Zünd, spokesman for the OFEN. It states that ten large properties had been examined, which is not a representative sample. On the contrary, the OFEN states that tenants could see the bill drop, according to a study published last year. "It concludes that climate-friendly renovations and the replacement of heating systems in older buildings can reduce overall costs for tenants," says Marianne Zünd. Although the investments may be partly passed on to the rent, they also reduce ancillary costs for tenants." In response, the HEV acknowledges that the study in question was not representative because it focused on large properties. It recalls that half of the rental apartments are owned by small private owners for whom "refurbishing costs may be higher due to the lack of economies of scale". The organization believes that the benefits of renovations and CO2 tax refunds will not be sufficient to avoid an increase in rents. "We consider the rent supplement of CHF 140 to be a realistic figure, especially if other measures need to be taken in addition to the replacement of the heating," concludes the rapporteur. The HEV association is very active in German-speaking Switzerland. The French Real Estate Federation, for its part, leaves the freedom to vote on the CO2 law. J.C. and P.M.