Opinions The law it takes to act in favor of climate Alexander de Senarclens Deputy PLR Global warming is one of the greatest challenges facing humanity. Switzerland is particularly affected, the country warms twice as fast as the global average with the consequences of heat waves, droughts, floods, melting glaciers and loss of biodiversity, to name but a few. More broadly, these climate changes have and will have geopolitical implications with population displacements from the south to the north ("climate refugees") and renewed tensions over water control in drought-stricken regions of the world. Aware of its responsibilities, our country has signed the Paris Climate Agreement and has committed itself to reducing its greenhouse gas (CO2) emissions by half by 2030, from its 1990 level. This is precisely the objective of the new CO2 law. To achieve this, the Act provides for a number of measures. These include new standards for buildings; more stringent CO2 emission rules for vehicle importers; an increase of 10 to 12 cents per litre of gasoline from 2025; an increase under certain conditions of the current CO2 tax with the possibility for companies to be exempted if they make commitments to reduce their emissions; a new tax on airline tickets based on distance travelled and class of transport. These taxes are all so-called "incentives". Thus, their product does not fall into the State funds but is donated to citizens and businesses. In particular, a climate fund will be set up to enable the clean-up of buildings, the promotion of renewable energy sources, the replacement of pollutant heaters, etc. This fund will also help promote innovation through loans to businesses to develop and commercialize processes to reduce emissions. The balance of the money collected, not paid to the climate fund, will be redistributed to the population by a discount on health insurance premiums and to the AVS compensation funds. This new law reinforces the law currently in force. In economic terms, it will offer opportunities for growth and incentives for innovation. Similarly, the decline in fossil energy consumption will reduce our dependence on foreign countries, thereby strengthening the position of Swiss companies in the face of international competition. The CO2 law is based on the polluter pays principle in order to encourage citizens to change some of their behaviour. These measures are effective and will enable us to achieve our environmental objectives. Let us now act to preserve our living conditions and support the CO2 law in the ballot box. Face-to-face CO2 law: what to vote for? The Chambers approved the CO2 law, but a referendum against it was launched and the Swiss vote was required on this subject on 13 June. Intended to bring Switzerland into line with the Paris Climate Agreement, this text is defended here by the Geneva MP Alexandre de Senarclens and fought by the communications and political campaign delegate of the Centre patronal in Lausanne.