On the climate, the PLR has a concern for credibility with its base While the party is one of the artisans of the text and leads the campaign of the yes, half of its electorate is ready to put everything in the trash. Malaise. Florent Quiquerez Bern Federal votes 13 June 2021 Should we talk about green "swing" or green "mirage"? Prior to the 2019 federal election, the PLR – by its president Petra Gössi – announced an ecological turning point, which was then accredited by a large internal poll. The CO2 law, which was put to the vote on 13 June, is the result of this "revolution". However, according to the first trends, there is a huge gap between the base of the PLR and its political representatives. First cold, the Tamedia investigation (editor of this newspaper). Published a week ago, it showed that 59% of PLR supporters were ready to oppose the law, compared to 38% who supported it. The GfS survey published on Friday is more optimistic. But with 48% no and 47% yes, the opponent's camp remains the majority in the PLR. The party was expected to be divided on this theme. Sections of the Young PLR are fighting the law and, from the outset, critical voices have been raised against this environmental turning point, especially from the elected representatives close to the road lobby. What surprises us, however, is the magnitude of this challenge within the base. "A good compromise" Christian Wasserfallen (PLR/BE), he is not surprised. In disagreement over the "green turn", the national councillor had eventually left the party's vice-president. "The internal poll in the party did not correspond to the reality of our base. I said it from the start; unfortunately, no one wanted to listen to me. Our voters have different opinions on this subject. And that's why we have a problem with mobilization. The PLR must focus on topics where it is united, such as our initiatives on annuities or individual taxation, rather than on topics that divide it." Not at all, says Petra Gössi. "Two internal surveys of our base have made it clear that our members want us to strengthen our commitment to climate and environmental policy," she said. "It is now necessary to demonstrate that this law is a good compromise, which emphasizes individual responsibility and encourages innovation. "And above all that it applies the principle of "polluter pays" and that the new taxes will not fall into the pocket of public authorities but will be redistributed." Epidermal reactions Secretary General of the party, Fanny Noghero agrees. "Our base has a true ecological sensitivity, but for the most conservative fringe, the word "taxes" provokes epidermal reactions. We need to argue even better over the next few weeks on their entirely redistributive side. For the moment, in the yes campaign, we have heard a lot of the arguments on the left, we must now highlight those on the right." To explain this shift, Philippe Nantermod recalls that "we must not confuse the members of the party and the sympathizers". For the Vice-President, the results of the GfS investigation are not so bad. "This law is not a 100% PLR project. We must convince our electorate that the efforts we are calling for are worth it. It takes time. It is not obvious to defend the introduction of new taxes." The law, supported by all parties except the UDC and the alternative left, went largely winning. These liberal-radical hesitations revive suspense, even if the yes is always in the lead. "If we want to win, each party must convince its electorate with its own arguments," said Senator Adèle Thorens (Verts/VD). The LRP must show at its core that the law will not be at the expense of the economy, that SMEs will not be the victims of the new measures. On the contrary, this text offers them new opportunities." "This time, the PLR has to move," we hear from the partisans. "We have been taking our pilgrim's stick for months to convince in our sections in the cantons," says Fanny Noghero. Seventeen of them have already taken a stand. All support the law, except Basel City, and Ticino, who abstained. We will continue this work." And to remind that the cancellation of all the demonstrations because of Covid does not facilitate the task. "At the end, the majority of the PLR will be behind this law," said Philippe Nantermod.