2000 people march for the climate The Strike for the Future did not mobilize as much as in 2019. But she didn't demerit either. Christian Bernt The Strike for the Future did not miss his appointment. This climate movement could fear the worst for its return to the public scene after the major protests in 2019: a threatening weather, students asked to stay in class and a casana spirit forged by a year of pandemic. Friday at 5 p.m., when the procession started, there were only a few hundred people on the Plain of Plainpalais. Finally, the ranks grew as the march went on, and we had about 2000 participants, mostly young, on Rues-Basses. The organizers estimate that they have been more than 2500. In any case, we are far from the demonstrations of January 2019, which had seen nearly 5000 students and students going down the street. So it's not a rise in power, but it's not ridiculous either, given the context. After a year of restraint, all mechanics are to be traced, including political mobilizations. Myriam Grosse is at any rate radiant at the end of the procession. This 22-year-old biology student shouted a lot in her microphone throughout the course. "We had concerns about attendance, especially because the students were not released. But I'm finally happy with the result, and the atmosphere was excellent. We do our classes and learn over time how to mobilize." Alliance with unions This apprenticeship has already borne fruit. The Climate Strike expanded and became a Strike for the Future. Feminist groups and trade unions have joined the climate collectives. Who took the step towards the other? "The climate activists have come to us," says trade unionist Davide de Filippo, president of the Geneva Community of Trade Union Action. For they realize that they have to learn in terms of power relations. On our side, it woke us up. For these issues have long remained marginal in our home. However, global warming will have a direct impact on workers." However, it is surprising to see trade unions, which are committed to productivity, agree with the followers of decline. How to share wealth if the cake is smaller? "The problem is not the size of the cake but redistribution. And the climate transition will generate new jobs," says the trade unionist. Trade unions want to encourage vocational retraining. "Rather than supporting the airport to save jobs, we want to promote transfers. A driver on the tarmac could go to work at the TPGs. And a bag operator becomes a transporter at the Hospital." This rapprochement between trade unions and climate movements, but also with feminists, is clearly assumed. "Social and climate justice are inseparable, assures one of the speakers in advance of the procession. For injustices have the same cause, capitalism. As it needs growth, it is constantly exploiting natural resources, and as it seeks short-term profit, it is unable to integrate the costs it is carrying to the environment." CO2 Law Division These positions have found expression on the numerous calicots worn by the demonstrators. "Less rich, more hives", "Less turnover, more polar bears", "The wrong Amazon is burning". On the other hand, there is no slogan on the CO2 law, which was put to the vote in June. For the movement is divided on the question. For some, the law does not go far enough. The others are holding "one of yours is better than two you will have." Among the protesters, one argument has often come back, expressed notably by Magali, a 24-year-old student: "With the Covid, we saw that governments could act quickly. They must do the same for the climate." "We had concerns about attendance, especially because the students were not released." Myriam Grosse 22-year-old biology student